 In addition, the theory of onboard diagnosis of problems with exhaust emission control systems is presented for the first time in any of the editions of this book.
 The development of solid-state electronics, from the first transistors through the latest high performance integrated circuits, came at a time that permitted the very sophisticated electronic systems discussed in this book to be applied to solving automotive control and instrumentation problems.
 Chapter 4 discusses microprocessors/microcontrollers and certain fundamental aspects of their application in automotive electronic systems.
 Chapter 5 presents the fundamentals of electronic engine control.
 Chapter 6 surveys sensors and actuators found in automotive electronic control or instrumentation systems that are arguably the most important components in such systems.
 The remaining chapters discuss specific automotive systems that incorporate electronics for control or instrumentation purposes.
 The automotive components/systems covered include engine, drivetrain, suspension, steering, brakes, instrumentation, telematics and diagnostics as well as motion control.
 In the general field of electronic systems (including automotive systems), there are three major categories of function, including control, measurement, and communication.
 Depending on whether a given electronic system application is to (a) control, (b) measure, or (c) communicate, it will have one of the three block diagram configurations shown in Figure 1.
1: Electronic system block diagrams variable being controlled.
1a depicts the architecture or configuration for a control application electronic system.
 In such a system, control of a physical subsystem (called the plant) occurs by regulating some physical variable (or variables) through an actuator.
 The plant being controlled varies in response to changes in the actuator output.
 The control is determined by electronic signal processing based on measurement of some variable (or variables) by a sensor in relationship to a command input by the operator of the system (i.
 In an electronic control system, the output of the sensor is always an electrical signal (denoted e1 in Figure 1.
 The input is the desired value of the physical variable in the plant being controlled.
 The signal processing is designed to achieve the desired control of the plant in relation to the variable being measured by the sensor.
 The operation of such a control system is described later in this chapter.
 At this point, we are interested only in describing the control-system architecture.
 A redundant explanation of electronic control is presented later in this chapter.
  The Systems Approach to Control and Instrumentation 5 The architecture for electronic measurement (also known as instrumentation) is similar to that for a control system in the sense that both structures incorporate a sensor and electronic signal processing.
 It should be noted that both control and instrumentation electronic systems use one or more sensors as well as electronic signal processing.
 Rather, automatic control systems have a topology that involves connecting the output of some block to the input of a previous block as will be explained later.
  20  Chapter 1  Control Theory Electronic control systems have many applications in modern automobiles.
 We present here a general theory of linear control systems that is useful for explaining and understanding those encountered in later chapters.
 There are two major categories of control systems: open-loop (or feedforward) and closedloop (or feedback) systems.
  Open-Loop Control The components of an open-loop controller include the electronic controller, which has an output to an actuator.
  Open-Loop Control The components of an open-loop controller include the electronic controller, which has an output to an actuator.
 The actuator, in turn, regulates the plant being controlled in accordance with the desired relationship between the command input and the value of the controlled variable in the plant.
 The actuator, in turn, regulates the plant being controlled in accordance with the desired relationship between the command input and the value of the controlled variable in the plant.
 Many examples of open-loop control are encountered in automotive electronic systems, such as fuel control in certain operating modes.
 Many examples of open-loop control are encountered in automotive electronic systems, such as fuel control in certain operating modes.
 An open-loop control system never compares actual output with the desired value.
 In the open-loop control system of Figure 1.
7, the command input is sent to the electronic controller, which performs a control operation on the input to generate an intermediate electrical signal (denoted i in Figure 1.
7, the command input is sent to the electronic controller, which performs a control operation on the input to generate an intermediate electrical signal (denoted i in Figure 1.
 This electrical signal is the input to the actuator which generates a control input (denoted u in Figure 1.
 This type of control is called open-loop control because the output of the system is never compared with the command input to evaluate controlsystem performance at regulating the output to the desired input.
 This type of control is called open-loop control because the output of the system is never compared with the command input to evaluate controlsystem performance at regulating the output to the desired input.
 This type of control is called open-loop control because the output of the system is never compared with the command input to evaluate controlsystem performance at regulating the output to the desired input.
 Chapter 6 presents a discussion of various actuators used in automotive electronic control systems.
  The Systems Approach to Control and Instrumentation 21 One of the principal drawbacks to the open-loop controller is its inability to compensate for changes that might occur in the controller or the plant or for any disturbances or due to environmental changes.
  The Systems Approach to Control and Instrumentation 21 One of the principal drawbacks to the open-loop controller is its inability to compensate for changes that might occur in the controller or the plant or for any disturbances or due to environmental changes.
 This defect is eliminated in a closed-loop control system, in which the actual system output is compared to the desired output value in accordance with the input.
  Closed-Loop Control In its simplest form (which can be expanded to cover very complex systems), the block diagram of a so-called “electronic feedback-control system” is depicted in Figure 1.
 In this configuration, the control system is intended to regulate the output (y) of a system or subsystem called the “plant.
” Normally the goal of this control system is to have the output equal to the system input (x) often called the reference input.
 Wherever a difference (called error ˛) between the output and reference input is nonzero, the control subsystem or compensator (an electronic subsystem) generates a variable (u) that causes the plant input to change in such a way as to reduce the error toward zero.
8 is called a feedback-control system because a measurement of the plant output via a sensor is “fed back” to the input.
 In order that the control variable u can cause a change in the plant output there must be a component (i.
 The goal of the present discussion is to develop models for the feedback-control system by which its dynamic performance can be analyzed.
 The performance of the control system is influenced by its system component dynamics.
 Normally the control-system designer can optimize closed-loop system performance in some sense by proper design of the compensator/controller.
 Normally the control-system designer can optimize closed-loop system performance in some sense by proper design of the compensator/controller.
 In modern automotive electronic control systems, the compensator (input) x  Є  + –  compensator (controller) Hc(s) ys  u  Plant Hp(s)  (output) y  Sensor Hs(s)  Figure 1.
 In modern automotive electronic control systems, the compensator (input) x  Є  + –  compensator (controller) Hc(s) ys  u  Plant Hp(s)  (output) y  Sensor Hs(s)  Figure 1.
8: Closed-loop feedback-control-system configuration.
  22  Chapter 1  is implemented by a microprocessor or microcontroller as explained in later chapters.
 In such cases the compensator operation is determined by the program(s) running its microcontroller.
 However, at this point it is useful to characterize the entire closed-loop control system as a continuous time system.
 The next chapter discusses discrete time models and digital control techniques.
 PI: Hc ðsÞ ¼ Kp +  The closed-loop dynamic response is influenced by the type of control via the compensator.
 Generally, the compensator (or controller) performs a transformation on the error signal to satisfy certain criteria, including: 1.
 A proportional controller (i.
  24  Chapter 1  The addition of a derivative term to the compensator resulting in a PID controller can improve the transient response in certain respects relative to a PI controller.
  24  Chapter 1  The addition of a derivative term to the compensator resulting in a PID controller can improve the transient response in certain respects relative to a PI controller.
 The relative benefits of these types of controllers depend upon the particular application as well as the other system criteria.
 A closed-loop control system is to be formed in which the vertical position is to be regulated to the reference x by the force which is generated by an actuator.
 The actuator model is F ¼ Ka u where Ka is the actuator constant and u is the control signal from the compensator.
 The practical automotive application for this example could be a commanded change in the vehicle height above the ground in an electronically controlled suspension system (see chapter on motion control).
 The practical automotive application for this example could be a commanded change in the vehicle height above the ground in an electronically controlled suspension system (see chapter on motion control).
10: Response of proportional feedback-control system.
 R Consider next the step response of a PI controller.
 An integral term ðKI ˛dtÞ was added to the controller of the previous example.
 Generally speaking, the addition of an integral term in the controller forces the steady-state error toward zero.
 Note also that the overshoot (about 25%) is greater than the proportional controller (about 12.
 A further improvement to the dynamic response of a control system is possible by including a derivative term  The Systems Approach to Control and Instrumentation 27  Figure 1.
11: Response of proportionaleintegral feedback-control system.
 The above examples clearly show that PID control has the potential for excellent closed-loop dynamic response.
 Caution must be exercised by the control-system design in choosing the type of controller as well as the gains.
 Caution must be exercised by the control-system design in choosing the type of controller as well as the gains.
 In the extreme case, the controller, if poorly designed, can yield an unstable closed-loop system as will be discussed in the next section of this chapter.
12: Response of PID control system.
  Stability of Control System One of the most important issues concerning the practical utility of any control system is its stability.
 Simply put, a control system is stable if a bounded input results in a bounded output.
 However, the stability of a closed-loop control system does not necessarily require that the plant being controlled is, itself, stable.
 However, the stability of a closed-loop control system does not necessarily require that the plant being controlled is, itself, stable.
 In fact, a control system can, in certain cases, stabilize an unstable plant such as in the case of many modern fighter aircraft (e.
 However, the application of a stabilizing control system for an unstable plant is rare in automotive applications.
 Modern control methodology offers the system designer many important tools for assessing the stability of a control system.
 Modern control methodology offers the system designer many important tools for assessing the stability of a control system.
 Commercially available software provides a control-system designer the capability of rapidly assessing the stability of a candidate control system provided a relatively robust linear mathematical model is available for the system.
 Commercially available software provides a control-system designer the capability of rapidly assessing the stability of a candidate control system provided a relatively robust linear mathematical model is available for the system.
 It is beyond the scope of this book to cover all techniques for evaluating control-system stability.
 It is important in any control-system application and especially so in automotive  The Systems Approach to Control and Instrumentation 29 systems to have some margin of stability to insure that the system remains stable even if some system parameters change with time over the vehicle lifetime.
 One way of evaluating the robustness of a control system to parameter variations is through an analysis technique called gain and phase margin, which is also explained below.
 A root locus of a control system is a plot of the poles of its closed-loop transfer function as some system parameter is varied.
 It has been shown that the closed-loop transfer function for a plant having open-loop transfer function Hp(s) being controlled by a controller having transfer function Hc(s) and assuming an ideal sensor (i.
 It has been shown that the closed-loop transfer function for a plant having open-loop transfer function Hp(s) being controlled by a controller having transfer function Hc(s) and assuming an ideal sensor (i.
4 and having transfer function given by Eqn (51) with a PID controller.
 The transfer function for this controller is given by Hc ðsÞ ¼ Kp þ  KI þ KD s s  (61)  which can be rewritten in the form   Kp KD 2 KI s þsþ Hc ðsÞ ¼ s Kp Kp  (62)  The parameter K in the general formula given above for root locus is taken to be Kp.
 The root-locus technique can be used to assist the design of the controller particularly if the specifications for the closed-loop system performance include placing the corresponding poles in certain regions of the complex plane.
13: Root-locus plot for example PID control system.
 A closed-loop system whose controller was designed/optimized at one operating point and found to be stable there may not be stable at other operating points.
 For any given set of controller gains, the characteristic equation can be written as 1 þ LðsÞ ¼ 0  (64)  32  Chapter 1  where LðsÞ ¼ Hc ðsÞ Hr ðsÞ  (65)  and where L(s) is called the loop gain.
 We illustrate gain and phase margin using the example second-order system with PID controller.
 The control electronics used in the example of Figure 1.
10 provided what is called proportional control because the control signal is proportional to the error signal.
10 provided what is called proportional control because the control signal is proportional to the error signal.
 Other combinations of control electronics are possible, and it is a challenge to the system designer to develop imaginative types of control electronics to improve the performance of a given plant.
 Other combinations of control electronics are possible, and it is a challenge to the system designer to develop imaginative types of control electronics to improve the performance of a given plant.
14: Bode plot for example PID control system.
  34  Chapter 1  Closed-Loop Limit-Cycle Control Another type of control that is used in automotive applications is limit-cycle control.
  34  Chapter 1  Closed-Loop Limit-Cycle Control Another type of control that is used in automotive applications is limit-cycle control.
 Limitcycle control is a type of feedback control that monitors the system’s output and responds only when the output goes beyond preset limits.
 Limitcycle control is a type of feedback control that monitors the system’s output and responds only when the output goes beyond preset limits.
 Limit-cycle controllers often are used to control plants with nonlinear or complicated transfer functions.
 Limit-cycle controllers often are used to control plants with nonlinear or complicated transfer functions.
 Limit-cycle control responds only when the error is outside a pair of limits.
 An example of a limit-cycle controller is the temperature-controlled oven depicted in Figure 1.
 An example of a limit-cycle controller is the temperature-controlled oven depicted in Figure 1.
 The temperature inside the oven is controlled by the length of time the heating coil is energized.
 The control electronics checks the error signal against the temperature control dial to determine if one of the following two conditions exists: 1.
 The control electronics checks the error signal against the temperature control dial to determine if one of the following two conditions exists: 1.
 The control electronics responds to error condition 1 by closing the relay contacts to energize the heating element.
15: Example limit-cycle control system.
 In this case, the control electronics opens the relay contacts and the heat is turned off.
 The amplitude of the temperature variations, called the differential, can be decreased by reducing the difference between the maximum and minimum temperature limits that are set in the controller.
 Thus, the limit-cycle controller controls the system to maintain an average value close to the command input, yet cycles above and below the desired value.
 Thus, the limit-cycle controller controls the system to maintain an average value close to the command input, yet cycles above and below the desired value.
 This type of controller has gained popularity due to its simplicity, low cost, and ease of application.
 Fuel control, one of the most important automotive electronic control systems, is, at least partially, a limit-cycle control system (see Chapter 5).
 Fuel control, one of the most important automotive electronic control systems, is, at least partially, a limit-cycle control system (see Chapter 5).
 Fuel control, one of the most important automotive electronic control systems, is, at least partially, a limit-cycle control system (see Chapter 5).
 A limit-cycle control system is not linear and is, consequently, not amenable to analysis by the linear techniques described above.
 Rather, the performance of any given limit-cycle control system is best accomplished via simulation.
  Upper control limit MAX.
 LIMIT  Lower control limit Figure 1.
16: Frequency response for limit-cycle control system.
, fuel quantity) might have lower accuracy requirements than those used for applications such as engine control or diagnosis.
  This page intentionally left blank  CHAPTER 2  Discrete Time Systems Theory Chapter Outline Digital Subsystem 55 Sinusoidal Frequency Response 56 Discrete Time Control System 63 Closed Loop Control 68 Example Discrete Time Control System Summary 77  72  As explained in the previous chapter, automotive electronic control and instrumentation systems (as well as virtually all other electrical systems) are implemented with digital electronics as at least some component or subsystem.
 Digital controllers and/or signal processing subsystems incorporate one or more microprocessors or microcontrollers, each having a stored program to run the system.
 Digital controllers and/or signal processing subsystems incorporate one or more microprocessors or microcontrollers, each having a stored program to run the system.
 The computer, under program control, calculates the numerical value of the filter output yk.
 For control applications, the digital “filter” output would be sent to an actuator that is associated with the plant being controlled.
 For control applications, the digital “filter” output would be sent to an actuator that is associated with the plant being controlled.
 In this case, the output of the digital controller (filter) must be converted to analog form via the D/A converter.
 The D/A process at the output of the discrete time digital control system using a ZOH is best described from its idealized model.
 These pulses can be modeled as ideal impulses and, in practice, are created by a D/A converter from the output sequences {un} of the digital controller.
 The ZOH output yields a piecewise continuous function uðtÞ of the corresponding continuous control signal u(t) that would be generated by the analog (continuous time) prototype system from which the discrete time system was developed.
 In a control system application, the ZOH output drives the plant actuator, which, in turn, drives the plant dynamics.
 The configuration for an open-loop system utilizing a digital controller is depicted in Figure 2.
6: Open-loop discrete time control system.
  66  Chapter 2  The model for the digital controller is uðzÞ ¼ Hc ðzÞXðzÞ  (54)  In terms of the starred transfer function this model, with the substitution z ¼ est, can be written as u ðsÞ ¼ H  ðsÞX  ðsÞ  (55)  The A/D and D/A converters, controller and plant can be combined to yield the output Y(s) YðsÞ ¼ Hp ðsÞuðsÞ   1  esT  u ðsÞ ¼ Hp ðsÞ s The z-transform of the output Y(z) is given by   ð1  esT Þ YðzÞ ¼ Z Hp ðsÞ uðzÞ s  (56)  (57)  (58)   ð1  esT Þ ¼Z Hp ðsÞ Hc ðzÞXðzÞ s  (59)    ðHp ðsÞÞ ¼ ð1  z ÞZ Hc ðzÞXðzÞ s  (60)    1  Eqn (60) is obtained from Eqn (59) from the time shift property of the z-transform.
  66  Chapter 2  The model for the digital controller is uðzÞ ¼ Hc ðzÞXðzÞ  (54)  In terms of the starred transfer function this model, with the substitution z ¼ est, can be written as u ðsÞ ¼ H  ðsÞX  ðsÞ  (55)  The A/D and D/A converters, controller and plant can be combined to yield the output Y(s) YðsÞ ¼ Hp ðsÞuðsÞ   1  esT  u ðsÞ ¼ Hp ðsÞ s The z-transform of the output Y(z) is given by   ð1  esT Þ YðzÞ ¼ Z Hp ðsÞ uðzÞ s  (56)  (57)  (58)   ð1  esT Þ ¼Z Hp ðsÞ Hc ðzÞXðzÞ s  (59)    ðHp ðsÞÞ ¼ ð1  z ÞZ Hc ðzÞXðzÞ s  (60)    1  Eqn (60) is obtained from Eqn (59) from the time shift property of the z-transform.
 The time domain system output at times tk is found by computing the inverse z-transform of Y(z): yðkTÞ ¼ Z 1 ½YðzÞ  (61)  As an example of the analysis of an open-loop system having a digital controller we consider a simple 1st-order plant having an analog transfer function given by Hp ðsÞ ¼  1 sþ1  We further assume a simple PD controller having the following difference equation:   xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT uðktÞ ¼ Kp ðkTÞ þ KD T  (62)  Discrete Time Systems Theory 67 For the purposes of illustrating this procedure, we make the numerical simplification Kp ¼ 1 and (KD/T) ¼ 1 yielding the following control algorithm: uðkTÞ ¼ 2xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT  (63)  The controller digital transfer function Hc ðzÞ can be found by taking the z-transform of the time domain model Hc ðzÞ ¼ 2  z1 ¼  2z  1 z  The z-transform of the combined zero-order hold/plant is given by   1  eTs 1  eT Z ¼ sðs þ 1Þ z  eT  (64)  (65)  as found from the transform tables (Table 2.
 The time domain system output at times tk is found by computing the inverse z-transform of Y(z): yðkTÞ ¼ Z 1 ½YðzÞ  (61)  As an example of the analysis of an open-loop system having a digital controller we consider a simple 1st-order plant having an analog transfer function given by Hp ðsÞ ¼  1 sþ1  We further assume a simple PD controller having the following difference equation:   xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT uðktÞ ¼ Kp ðkTÞ þ KD T  (62)  Discrete Time Systems Theory 67 For the purposes of illustrating this procedure, we make the numerical simplification Kp ¼ 1 and (KD/T) ¼ 1 yielding the following control algorithm: uðkTÞ ¼ 2xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT  (63)  The controller digital transfer function Hc ðzÞ can be found by taking the z-transform of the time domain model Hc ðzÞ ¼ 2  z1 ¼  2z  1 z  The z-transform of the combined zero-order hold/plant is given by   1  eTs 1  eT Z ¼ sðs þ 1Þ z  eT  (64)  (65)  as found from the transform tables (Table 2.
 The time domain system output at times tk is found by computing the inverse z-transform of Y(z): yðkTÞ ¼ Z 1 ½YðzÞ  (61)  As an example of the analysis of an open-loop system having a digital controller we consider a simple 1st-order plant having an analog transfer function given by Hp ðsÞ ¼  1 sþ1  We further assume a simple PD controller having the following difference equation:   xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT uðktÞ ¼ Kp ðkTÞ þ KD T  (62)  Discrete Time Systems Theory 67 For the purposes of illustrating this procedure, we make the numerical simplification Kp ¼ 1 and (KD/T) ¼ 1 yielding the following control algorithm: uðkTÞ ¼ 2xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT  (63)  The controller digital transfer function Hc ðzÞ can be found by taking the z-transform of the time domain model Hc ðzÞ ¼ 2  z1 ¼  2z  1 z  The z-transform of the combined zero-order hold/plant is given by   1  eTs 1  eT Z ¼ sðs þ 1Þ z  eT  (64)  (65)  as found from the transform tables (Table 2.
 The time domain system output at times tk is found by computing the inverse z-transform of Y(z): yðkTÞ ¼ Z 1 ½YðzÞ  (61)  As an example of the analysis of an open-loop system having a digital controller we consider a simple 1st-order plant having an analog transfer function given by Hp ðsÞ ¼  1 sþ1  We further assume a simple PD controller having the following difference equation:   xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT uðktÞ ¼ Kp ðkTÞ þ KD T  (62)  Discrete Time Systems Theory 67 For the purposes of illustrating this procedure, we make the numerical simplification Kp ¼ 1 and (KD/T) ¼ 1 yielding the following control algorithm: uðkTÞ ¼ 2xðkTÞ  x½ðk  1ÞT  (63)  The controller digital transfer function Hc ðzÞ can be found by taking the z-transform of the time domain model Hc ðzÞ ¼ 2  z1 ¼  2z  1 z  The z-transform of the combined zero-order hold/plant is given by   1  eTs 1  eT Z ¼ sðs þ 1Þ z  eT  (64)  (65)  as found from the transform tables (Table 2.
 The dynamic response for this example system is characterized by its response to a unit step xðtÞ ¼ 1 ¼0  t0 t<0  The z-transform for this input x(z) is given by XðzÞ ¼  z z1  (66)  The controller output u(z) is given by  uðzÞ ¼    2z  1 z z z1  (67)  2z  1 ¼ z1 The output of this example Y(z) is given by    2z  1 1  eT z YðzÞ ¼ T ze z z1 ð2z  1Þð1  eT Þ ¼ ðz  eT Þðz  1Þ  (68)  68  Chapter 2  It can be shown that the time domain system output (which is z1 ½YðZ Þ) is given by yk ¼ ½1 þ ð1  2eT Þeðk1ÞT uðk  1Þ  (69)  The continuous time output is given by a smooth curve connecting all of the sampled points at times tk.
 Similar procedures can be followed for analyzing the dynamic response of other open-loop systems involving other plants and controllers.
7 in which, for notational simplicity the zero-order hold, controller, and plant are represented by a single transfer function H(s).
 It is common practice in developing a closed-loop control system to work with continuous time models.
 These models can yield an analog controller transfer function using methods discussed in the previous chapter (e.
, P, PI, and PID type control) with gain optimization to satisfy requirements as closely as possible.
 Then, once the optimized analog transfer function for the controller is found the corresponding digital transfer function H(z) can be obtained by the methods given above.
 For example, a digital controller system might be of the form of a PID control law.
 For example, a digital controller system might be of the form of a PID control law.
 For this case, the control output at time tn (i.
 The control transfer function can be found by taking the z-transform of the control law, making use of the time shift property.
 The control transfer function can be found by taking the z-transform of the control law, making use of the time shift property.
 For the above control law, the control variable u(z) is given by # " k k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ 1 ð1  z Þ þ KI T EðzÞ (89) uðzÞ ¼ Kp þ T 2 k¼1 The control transfer function Hc(z) is then given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ EðzÞ  (90)  where E(z) ¼ Z {˛k } and where Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  L k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ ð1  z1 Þ þ KI T T 2 k¼1  (91)  72  Chapter 2  Example Discrete Time Control System We illustrate the above discrete time control methodology with a specific example.
 For the above control law, the control variable u(z) is given by # " k k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ 1 ð1  z Þ þ KI T EðzÞ (89) uðzÞ ¼ Kp þ T 2 k¼1 The control transfer function Hc(z) is then given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ EðzÞ  (90)  where E(z) ¼ Z {˛k } and where Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  L k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ ð1  z1 Þ þ KI T T 2 k¼1  (91)  72  Chapter 2  Example Discrete Time Control System We illustrate the above discrete time control methodology with a specific example.
 For the above control law, the control variable u(z) is given by # " k k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ 1 ð1  z Þ þ KI T EðzÞ (89) uðzÞ ¼ Kp þ T 2 k¼1 The control transfer function Hc(z) is then given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ EðzÞ  (90)  where E(z) ¼ Z {˛k } and where Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  L k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ ð1  z1 Þ þ KI T T 2 k¼1  (91)  72  Chapter 2  Example Discrete Time Control System We illustrate the above discrete time control methodology with a specific example.
 For the above control law, the control variable u(z) is given by # " k k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ 1 ð1  z Þ þ KI T EðzÞ (89) uðzÞ ¼ Kp þ T 2 k¼1 The control transfer function Hc(z) is then given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ EðzÞ  (90)  where E(z) ¼ Z {˛k } and where Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  L k X KD z þ zðkþ1Þ ð1  z1 Þ þ KI T T 2 k¼1  (91)  72  Chapter 2  Example Discrete Time Control System We illustrate the above discrete time control methodology with a specific example.
9 is a block diagram of a plant having transfer function Hp(s) and a discrete time digital control system.
 This system controls the plant output variable y(t) in response to the command input x(t).
 The digital control generates control signal uk in accordance with the desired control algorithm.
 The digital control generates control signal uk in accordance with the desired control algorithm.
 The digital control generates control signal uk in accordance with the desired control algorithm.
 It is assumed that the digital controller has a D/A converter such that uk are voltage pulses that are sent to the ZOH.
 A ZOH and filter convert the samples uk to a piecewise continuous time control signal uðtÞ, which operates the actuator that drives the plant.
 In order to reduce computational complexity, a proportional-only controller having proportional gain Kp and relatively simple plant model are assumed.
 However, the following procedure is followed regardless of controller and plant complexity.
9: Block diagram of example discrete time closed-loop control system (new figure).
 The present example discrete time control system is of the form Hp ðsÞ Ka ¼ 2 s ðs þ p1 Þ s  (103)  Table 2.
10: Unit step response of example discrete time closed-loop control system.
  The same procedure is used for finding the closed-loop transfer function and dynamic response sequence {yk} regardless of the complexity of the plant and controller transfer function complexity and the input waveform x(t).
 It is intended to provide an overview of the subject so that discussions in later chapters about the operation and use of automotive electronics control systems will be easier to understand.
 The chapter discusses electronic devices and circuits having applications in electronic automotive instrumentation and control systems.
 The conductivity of a pure semiconductor can be varied in a predictable manner by diffusing precisely controlled amounts of very specific impurities into it.
 Transistors are threeterminal circuit elements that act like voltage or current-controlled current amplifiers.
 Transistors come in two major categories that are termed “bipolar” or “field effect” depending upon whether they are current or voltage controlled, respectively.
 In this model, the collector current is modeled by a current-controlled current source (hfeIb) shunted by a resistance R (source impedance).
 In this model, the collector current ic is represented by a current-controlled ideal current source shunted by a source resistance Rc.
 They are in effect current-controlled current amplifiers.
 Another type of transistor operates as a voltagecontrolled amplifier and is called a field-effect transistor (FET).
 Rather, the voltage applied to the gate creates an electric field that controls current flow from source to drain.
 Regardless of the fabrication technology or the type of semiconductor, FET functions as a voltagecontrolled current source.
 A signal voltage vs applied at the gate electrode controls the current flow through the FET and thereby through the load resistance RL.
 Functionally, the FET operates like a voltage-controlled current source.
16 includes a voltage-controlled current source whose output current is controlled by gate voltage vG.
16 includes a voltage-controlled current source whose output current is controlled by gate voltage vG.
 In this case, the voltage-controlled current source with current  Electronics Fundamentals 99 RS  iD  G D  vS  VG  gmvG  R  RL  vo  s  Figure 3.
20 include a phase detector, a low-pass filter (LPF), and a voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO).
 The VCO is an oscillator having an output voltage vv(t) whose instantaneous frequency (uv(t)) is controlled by voltage vo (from the LPF) such that vv ðtÞ ¼ Vv cosðfv ðtÞÞ  (34)  Zt where  uv ðsÞds  fðtÞ ¼  (35)  o  uv ðtÞ ¼ u½vo ð0Þ þ Kv vo ðtÞ  (36)  where Kv is the constant for the VCO circuit.
 The PLL circuit is an electronic closed-loop control system (see Chapter 1).
 After a brief transient period during which the VCO frequency is controlled, its frequency is “locked” to us (i.
21b, the switch function is implemented via an FET whose source to drain resistance (RSD) is a function of a control voltage vg applied to the gate of the transistor.
 The switching operation can be achieved a control voltage by a periodic pulse train form as given by vg ðtÞ ¼ Vg  tk  t < tk þ ss  ¼0  tk  ss  t < tkþ1  (49)  With vg(t) above applied to the FET gate, the source/drain resistance is given by RSD ðVg Þ ¼ Ron  ðtransistor in saturationÞ  RSD ð0Þ ¼ Roff  ðtransistor in cutoffÞ  Ideally, these resistances should be Ron ¼ 0 Roff /N However, in practice, Roff is finite, but large, and Ron is small, but nonzero.
 The digital control system also generates a signal that controls the D/A operation such that, at the end of the conversion (EOC), the D/A output analog voltage uk corresponds to the numerical value of yk.
 The digital control system also generates a signal that controls the D/A operation such that, at the end of the conversion (EOC), the D/A output analog voltage uk corresponds to the numerical value of yk.
 Voltage vg is applied to the FET gate, which functions as a voltage-controlled switch (as explained above with respect to the sample circuit).
 Multiplication of two 1-bit numbers is characterized by elementary rules of multiplication: 00¼0 01¼0 10¼0 11¼1 Multiplication of an N-bit number by an M-bit number is implemented under program control in some form of stored program computer as explained in Chapter 4.
 On the other hand, the addition of multiple-bit numbers is of crucial importance in digital computers and, of course, in automotive digital control systems.
  J4 K4  Q4  Electronics Fundamentals 123 having the capability of so-called parallel load in which all data bits are transferred simultaneously into the corresponding flip-flop with control C high at the clock pulse.
 This latter register has two modes of operation: 1) transfer of data (A4A3A2A1) into the register with control C high and 2) shift right or left with control C low.
 This latter register has two modes of operation: 1) transfer of data (A4A3A2A1) into the register with control C high and 2) shift right or left with control C low.
 At each clock cycle, the bits are shifted one position right or left depending upon circuit configuration and/or program control.
 Such operations can be implemented either with dedicated (hard-wired) circuits or more commonly through program-controlled switching.
 A block diagram of a microprocessor/ microcontroller with more detail is given in Chapter 4.
 Early twenty-first-century automobiles incorporate dozens of microprocessors that are applied for a variety of uses from advanced powertrain control to simple tasks such as automatic seat and side-view mirror positioning.
  127  128  Chapter 4  Masking 153 Shift and AND 153 Use of Subroutines 153  Microcomputer Hardware 154 Central Processing Unit 154 Memory: ROM 155 Memory: RAM 156 I/O Parallel Interface 156 Digital-to-Analog Converter 156 Analog-to-Digital Converter 159 Sampling 162 Polling 162 Interrupts 163 Vectored Interrupts 163  Microcomputer Applications in Automotive Systems 164 Instrumentation Applications of Microcomputers 166 Digital Filters  168  Microcomputers in Control Systems  170  Closed-Loop Control System 171 Limit-Cycle Controller 171 Feedback Control Systems 171 Table Lookup 173 Multivariable and Multiple Task Systems  175  This chapter describes microcomputers and explains how they are used in instrumentation and control systems.
 Topics include microcomputer fundamentals, microcomputer equipment, microcomputer inputs and outputs, computerized instrumentation, and computerized control systems.
, a laptop) or a form of digital controller having a structure very much like a computer.
 For example, an engine control computer (as described in Chapter 7) would not include disk drive, keyboard, printer, or monitor.
  Microcomputer Tasks A suitably configured microcomputer can potentially perform any automotive control or instrumentation task.
 For example, it will be shown in a later chapter that a microcomputer can be configured to control fuel metering and ignition for an engine along with many other tasks.
 The microcomputer-based engine control system has much greater flexibility than the earliest electronic engine control systems, which, typically, used elementary logic circuits as well as  132  Chapter 4  analog circuits.
 The microcomputer-based engine control system has much greater flexibility than the earliest electronic engine control systems, which, typically, used elementary logic circuits as well as  132  Chapter 4  analog circuits.
 For these early systems, changes in the performance of the control system required changes in the circuitry (hardware).
 In addition to the address and data bus, there are sets of or wires that are called the control bus.
 It is this control bus that sends the binary signals to the components involved in any operation at the appropriate time to cause them to perform the specific operation.
  Memory Read/Write The CPU always controls the direction of data flow on the data bus because, although it is bidirectional, data can move in only one direction at a time.
 The CPU provides a special read/ write control signal (Figure 4.
 In this case, the read/write control line will be set at the logic level opposite to the read operation (i.
 During the memory read operation, the memory has temporary control of the data bus.
 The CPU provides a timing control signal,  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  135  called the clock, which regulates the memory internal timing to take and release control of the data bus.
 The CPU provides a timing control signal,  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  135  called the clock, which regulates the memory internal timing to take and release control of the data bus.
 However, they are built into the design of the machine and, therefore, are under machine control.
 For automotive control operations, realtime calculations are required (as explained later).
 The relatively efficient means of input/output of data via memory map facilitates operations such as digital filtering of sampled analog signals or for control operations as explained in Chapter 2.
 Such memory-mapped I/O is particularly helpful for speeding computer operations in discrete time control for automotive systems.
  Microprocessor Architecture The central component that controls and performs all operations in any microcomputer is the microprocessor, which is made up of many electronic subsystems all implemented in a single integrated circuit.
 As described in Chapter 3, a microprocessor consists of hundreds of thousands of transistors (on a single silicon chip) that are grouped together and interconnected to form the various subsystems, all of which are interconnected with internal address, data, and control buses.
 In addition, external connections are made to an oscillator (clock) as well as inputs and outputs: interrupt, ready (rdy), read/write control (R/W), and data bus enable (DBE), the operation of which is explained later in this chapter.
 This block diagram is divided into two main portions e a register section and a control section.
 The specific operations performed during the execution of a given step in the program are controlled by electrical signals from the instruction decoder.
 The result of this decoding process is a set of electrical control signals that are sent to the specific components of the register section that are involved in the instruction being executed.
 The operation of any digital computer is fully controlled by the program.
 For automotive control applications, the  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  141  controlling program must be efficient in order to perform its various tasks at a rate which is compatible with the speed of operations of the external sensors, actuators, and switches.
 For automotive control applications, the  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  141  controlling program must be efficient in order to perform its various tasks at a rate which is compatible with the speed of operations of the external sensors, actuators, and switches.
 A decoder determines from the op codes the operation to be executed, and a data register controls the flow of data inside the CPU as a result of the op code instructions.
 Each digital input controls the state of a single bit in the memory slot.
 The digital inputs are gated into the buffer under control of the CPU.
 For instance, if the computer is controlling the speed of the automobile, it might be desirable to be able to detect whether a driver is properly fastened in the seat before it sets the speed at 55 miles per hour.
  154  Chapter 4  In automotive electronic systems for control or instrumentation, there are many subroutines that are called repeatedly.
 It includes some form of arithmetic logic unit (ALU), as well as registers for data and instruction storage and a control section.
 For example, in  156  Chapter 4  automotive applications it may be desirable to permit authorized persons to modify a control system parameter of a vehicle after it has been in operation for some time to improve system performance.
  Digital-to-Analog Converter The parallel input and output interfaces are used to monitor and control external digital signals.
 As explained in Chapter 2, the microcomputer can also be used to measure and  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  157  control analog signals through the use of special interfaces.
 Typically, in control applications, the D/A converter output is connected to a ZOH before the converted voltage is sent to the actuator (see Chapter 2).
 As explained in Chapter 2, in control applications, the D/A converter ZOH combination is synchronized to the sampler, which samples the input to the control system.
 As explained in Chapter 2, in control applications, the D/A converter ZOH combination is synchronized to the sampler, which samples the input to the control system.
 At the sample time (tk), the analog-to-digital conversion process begins under computer control with several operations.
 The computer responds under program control to read the counter contents (Nc) which are the binary equivalent of the number of clock pulses Nc counted from tk to tk þ tc: Nc ¼ Nðtc Þ vk Nc ¼ KDA  (13)  The binary equivalent of Nc is denoted Nc2.
 The microcomputer outputs a control signal to cause the conversion to be initiated.
  Interrupts An efficient alternative to polling uses control circuitry, called an interrupt.
 The microcomputer program includes routines to control the timer for the desired amount of time by presetting the counter to some starting value other than zero.
 Such real-time systems are used in digital instrumentation and control systems in automotive applications.
 As will be explained in later chapters of this book, microprocessors find applications in engine and driveline control, instrumentation, ride control, antilock braking and other safety devices, entertainment, heating/air conditioning control, automatic seat position control, and many other systems.
 As will be explained in later chapters of this book, microprocessors find applications in engine and driveline control, instrumentation, ride control, antilock braking and other safety devices, entertainment, heating/air conditioning control, automatic seat position control, and many other systems.
 As will be explained in later chapters of this book, microprocessors find applications in engine and driveline control, instrumentation, ride control, antilock braking and other safety devices, entertainment, heating/air conditioning control, automatic seat position control, and many other systems.
 As will be explained in later chapters of this book, microprocessors find applications in engine and driveline control, instrumentation, ride control, antilock braking and other safety devices, entertainment, heating/air conditioning control, automatic seat position control, and many other systems.
 It is connected to the other components by means of three buses: address bus (AB), data bus (DB), and control bus (CB).
 Although the size of the DB is much larger in contemporary vehicles, the AB is typically larger than the DB and the control bus also is a set of wires, the number of which is determined by the complexity of the microprocessor.
 The operation of each special-purpose microcomputer system is controlled by a program stored in ROM.
  Instrumentation Applications of Microcomputers In instrumentation applications of microcomputers, the signal processing operations are performed numerically under program control.
, yn) is done by the digital system under program control.
 Multiplication can be performed by repeated use, under program control, of the basic multiply subroutine described above or in certain microprocessors by a special circuit section called “hardware multiply” in which the multiplication (e.
, akxnek) is performed by loading the variables into registers and then, by means of a control signal, the multiplication is performed by the circuitry with the result placed in a temporary storage register (e.
, averaging) can be performed by a computer under the control of the software.
 These features make microcomputers ideal for controlling other digital or analog systems, as discussed in the following sections.
  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  171  Closed-Loop Control System Recall the basic closed-loop control system block diagram of Chapter 1 (continuous time) and Chapter 2 (discrete time).
 A continuous time-control system performs the control law operations on the error signal to generate a continuous time-control signal (u) which is sent to the actuator via hardware.
 A continuous time-control system performs the control law operations on the error signal to generate a continuous time-control signal (u) which is sent to the actuator via hardware.
 A continuous time-control system performs the control law operations on the error signal to generate a continuous time-control signal (u) which is sent to the actuator via hardware.
 Recall that the discrete time system performs the control law calculation by performing operations on the sampled error between the desired and actual numerical values of the plant variable being controlled.
 Recall that the discrete time system performs the control law calculation by performing operations on the sampled error between the desired and actual numerical values of the plant variable being controlled.
 The calculations to be performed to obtain the control variable (i.
, uk of Chapter 2) can readily be done in a digital computer under program control.
 The computer can compare command input and plant output and perform the computation required to generate a control signal.
  Limit-Cycle Controller The limit-cycle controller, discussed in Chapter 1, can be readily implemented with a microcomputer.
 Recall that the limit-cycle controller controls the plant output so that it falls somewhere between an upper and lower limit, preferably so that its average value is equal to the command input.
 Recall that the limit-cycle controller controls the plant output so that it falls somewhere between an upper and lower limit, preferably so that its average value is equal to the command input.
 The controller must read in the command input and the plant output and determine via appropriate logic the value of the control signal to be sent to the plant based on those signals alone.
 The controller must read in the command input and the plant output and determine via appropriate logic the value of the control signal to be sent to the plant based on those signals alone.
  Feedback Control Systems Recall that in Chapters 1 and 2, the concept of a feedback control system was introduced.
 Those chapters dealt with the basic analytical models and control algorithms on an abstract level.
 In this chapter, the specific configuration incorporating a microcomputer as the control system implementation is considered.
 A feedback control system can also be implemented using a digital computer as well as the limit-cycle controller.
 A feedback control system can also be implemented using a digital computer as well as the limit-cycle controller.
24 shows the physical configuration of a control system employing a computer.
 In this figure, there is a physical system, or plant, that is to be controlled.
 The specific variable being controlled is denoted x.
 For example, in an automobile, the plant might be the engine and the controlled variable might be engine speed.
 Examples of feedback control are presented in later chapters of this book.
24: Digital feedback control system block diagram.
 A representative value of a control algorithm is the PID control law by which an output yn for each input sample is calculated by the computer: yn ¼ KP ˛n þ  K KI T X KD ð˛n  ˛n1 Þ ð˛nk þ ˛nk1 Þ þ 2 k¼1 T  where KP is the proportional gain, KI is the integral gain, KD is the differential gain, and T is the sample period.
 A representative value of a control algorithm is the PID control law by which an output yn for each input sample is calculated by the computer: yn ¼ KP ˛n þ  K KI T X KD ð˛n  ˛n1 Þ ð˛nk þ ˛nk1 Þ þ 2 k¼1 T  where KP is the proportional gain, KI is the integral gain, KD is the differential gain, and T is the sample period.
 In this PID controller, K is the number of samples from which the integral is calculated.
 The program for implementing this exemplary PID control law involves temporary storage of K  Microcomputer Instrumentation and Control  173  previous error samples for retrieval and computation of yn.
 The same type of program steps for implementing this control is used as those used for digital filter applications; that is, retrieval of variables, multiplication by the appropriate coefficients, and forming the algebraic sum of the various terms in the control law.
 The same type of program steps for implementing this control is used as those used for digital filter applications; that is, retrieval of variables, multiplication by the appropriate coefficients, and forming the algebraic sum of the various terms in the control law.
 There it is converted to analog format, providing a control signal uk to the actuator (A), which is presumed here to be analog.
 The actuator controls the plant in such a way as to cause the error to be reduced toward zero.
 Many examples of the application of computer-based electronic control systems in automobiles are presented in later chapters of this book.
 Then the MPU under program control calculates the addresses for the two nearest tabulated values to Vo, which are V1 and V2 (V1 < Vo < V2).
 The computer, under program control, reads values X1 and X2 and then calculates X using Eqn (9) (or higher-order polynomial fit algorithm).
 In particular, Chapter 7 will discuss how a typical digital engine control system frequently obtains data using table lookup.
  Multivariable and Multiple Task Systems A very important feature of microcomputer control logic is the ability to control multiple systems independently and to control systems with multiple inputs and outputs.
  Multivariable and Multiple Task Systems A very important feature of microcomputer control logic is the ability to control multiple systems independently and to control systems with multiple inputs and outputs.
  Multivariable and Multiple Task Systems A very important feature of microcomputer control logic is the ability to control multiple systems independently and to control systems with multiple inputs and outputs.
 The automotive applications for microcomputer control involve both of these types of multivariable systems.
 For instance, the automobile engine controller has several inputs (such as mass airflow rate, throttle angle, and camshaft and/or crankshaft angular position) and several outputs.
 All of the outputs must be controlled as close to simultaneously as is feasible within hardware capability and computation time limits because some inputs affect more than one output.
 These types of controllers can be very complicated and are difficult to implement in analog fashion.
 It only affects the task of programming the appropriate control scheme into the microcomputer.
 This type of control is discussed in a later chapter.
 Certain tasks such as fuel and spark control are required to be performed for every main loop cycle.
 Other, less time-critical tasks, such as filtering fuel quantity measurements, need to be performed at a much lower rate than the fuel and spark control tasks.
 Typically, a full program for the very complex powertrain control system (see Chapter 7) involves many thousands of individual lines of code.
 After a chapter on basics of automotive engine control and a chapter on sensors and actuators, this book will deal more specifically with particular microcomputer automotive instrumentation and control systems to show how these systems are used in the automobile to control the engine and drivetrain and many auxiliary functions.
 After a chapter on basics of automotive engine control and a chapter on sensors and actuators, this book will deal more specifically with particular microcomputer automotive instrumentation and control systems to show how these systems are used in the automobile to control the engine and drivetrain and many auxiliary functions.
 After a chapter on basics of automotive engine control and a chapter on sensors and actuators, this book will deal more specifically with particular microcomputer automotive instrumentation and control systems to show how these systems are used in the automobile to control the engine and drivetrain and many auxiliary functions.
  CHAPTER 5  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control Chapter Outline Motivation for Electronic Engine Control 178 Exhaust Emissions 178 Fuel Economy 179 Federal Government Test Procedures 180 Fuel Economy Requirements 181 Meeting the Requirements 183 The Role of Electronics 184 Additional cost incentive 184  Concept of an Electronic Engine Control System  184  Inputs to Controller 187 Output from Controller 188  Definition of Engine Performance Terms  193  Torque 193 Power 196 Fuel Consumption 198 Engine Overall Efficiency 200 Calibration 201 Engine Mapping 201 Effect of Air/Fuel Ratio on Performance 202 Effect of Spark Timing on Performance 203 Effect of Exhaust Gas Recirculation on Performance  Exhaust Catalytic Converters  204  206  Oxidizing Catalytic Converter 206 The Three-Way Catalyst 207  Electronic Fuel-Control System  209  Engine Control Sequence 212 Open-Loop Control 213 Closed-Loop Control 213 Exhaust gas oxygen concentration 214 Closed-Loop Operation 215 Frequency and deviation of the fuel controller  217  Analysis of Intake Manifold Pressure 219 Measuring Air Mass 220 Speed-density method 221  Understanding Automotive Electronics.
  177  178  Chapter 5  Influence of Valve System on Volumetric Efficiency Including EGR 223  223  Idle Speed Control 224 Electronic Ignition 230  Engine control in the vast majority of engines means regulating fuel and air intake as well as spark timing to achieve desired performance in the form of power output.
 Until the 1960s, control of the engine output torque and RPM was accomplished through some combination of mechanical, pneumatic, or hydraulic systems.
 Then, in the 1970s, electronic control systems were introduced.
 This chapter is intended to explain, in general terms, the theory of electronic control of a gasoline-fueled, spark-ignited automotive engine.
 Chapter 7 explains practical digital control methods and systems.
 The examples used to explain the major developments and principles of electronic control have been culled from the techniques of various manufacturers and do not necessarily represent any single automobile manufacturer at the highest level of detail.
  Motivation for Electronic Engine Control The initial motivation for electronic engine control came in part from two government requirements.
 Electronic engine control is only one of the automotive design factors involved in fuel economy improvements.
 Some of the exhaust constituents are considered harmful and are now under the control of the federal government.
 The exhaust emissions controlled by government standards are CO, HC, and NOx.
 Automotive exhaust emission control requirements began in the United States in 1966 when the California state regulations became effective.
 Since then, the federal government has imposed emission control limits for all states, and the standards became progressively tighter throughout the remainder of the twentieth century and will continue to tighten in the twenty-first century.
 Auto manufacturers found that the traditional engine controls could not control the engine sufficiently to meet these emission limits and maintain adequate engine performance at the same time, so they turned to electronic controls.
 Auto manufacturers found that the traditional engine controls could not control the engine sufficiently to meet these emission limits and maintain adequate engine performance at the same time, so they turned to electronic controls.
 Auto manufacturers found that the traditional engine controls could not control the engine sufficiently to meet these emission limits and maintain adequate engine performance at the same time, so they turned to electronic controls.
 In addition to improving emission control, another important feature of electronic engine control is its ability to improve fuel economy.
 In addition to improving emission control, another important feature of electronic engine control is its ability to improve fuel economy.
 The controls of the dynamometer can be set to simulate the correct load (including the effects of tire rolling resistance and aerodynamic drag) and inertia of the vehicle moving along a road under various conditions.
 However, the regulations themselves are important in that they provided motivation for expanded electronic controls.
1 using mechanical, electromechanical, hydraulic, or pneumatic controls like those used in preemission control vehicles have not been cost-effective.
1 using mechanical, electromechanical, hydraulic, or pneumatic controls like those used in preemission control vehicles have not been cost-effective.
 In addition, such controls cannot operate with sufficient accuracy across a range of production vehicles, over all operating  184  Chapter 5  conditions, and over the life of the vehicle to stay within the tolerance required by the EPA regulations.
 As in any physical system, the parameters of automotive engines and associated peripheral control devices can change with time.
 An electronic control system has the ability to automatically compensate for such changes and to adapt to any new set of operating conditions and make electronic controls a desirable option in the early stages of emission control.
 An electronic control system has the ability to automatically compensate for such changes and to adapt to any new set of operating conditions and make electronic controls a desirable option in the early stages of emission control.
 An electronic control system has the ability to automatically compensate for such changes and to adapt to any new set of operating conditions and make electronic controls a desirable option in the early stages of emission control.
  The Role of Electronics The use of digital electronic control has enabled automakers to meet the government regulations by controlling the system accurately with excellent tolerance.
  The Role of Electronics The use of digital electronic control has enabled automakers to meet the government regulations by controlling the system accurately with excellent tolerance.
 Additional cost incentive Besides providing control accuracy and stability, there is a cost incentive to use digital electronic control.
 Additional cost incentive Besides providing control accuracy and stability, there is a cost incentive to use digital electronic control.
 This has made the electronic digital control system for the engine, as well as other on-board automobile electronic systems, commercially feasible.
 In summary, the electronic engine control system duplicates the function of conventional legacy fluidic control systems, but with greater precision and long-term stability via adaptive control processes.
 In summary, the electronic engine control system duplicates the function of conventional legacy fluidic control systems, but with greater precision and long-term stability via adaptive control processes.
 In summary, the electronic engine control system duplicates the function of conventional legacy fluidic control systems, but with greater precision and long-term stability via adaptive control processes.
  Concept of an Electronic Engine Control System In order to understand electronic engine control, it is necessary to understand some fundamentals of how the power produced by the engine is controlled.
  Concept of an Electronic Engine Control System In order to understand electronic engine control, it is necessary to understand some fundamentals of how the power produced by the engine is controlled.
 It does this by controlling the airflow into the engine.
 The role of fuel control is to regulate the fuel that is mixed with the air so that it increases in proportion to the airflow.
 We consider next an electronic engine control system that regulates fuel flow to the engine.
 An electronic engine control system is an assembly of electronic and electromechanical components that continuously varies the fuel and spark settings in order to satisfy government exhaust emission and fuel economy regulations.
4 is a block diagram (at the most abstract level) of a generalized electronic engine control system.
 It will be explained later in this chapter that an automotive engine control has both openloop and closed-loop operating modes (see Chapter 1).
 As explained in Chapter 1, a closedloop control system requires measurements of certain output variables such that the controller can calculate the state of the system being controlled, whereas an open-loop system does not.
 As explained in Chapter 1, a closedloop control system requires measurements of certain output variables such that the controller can calculate the state of the system being controlled, whereas an open-loop system does not.
 As explained in Chapter 1, a closedloop control system requires measurements of certain output variables such that the controller can calculate the state of the system being controlled, whereas an open-loop system does not.
 The electronic engine control system receives input electrical signals from the various sensors that measure the state of the engine.
 From these signals, the controller generates output electrical signals to the actuators that determine the correct fuel delivery and spark timing.
 Models for and performance analysis of automotive engine control system sensors and actuators are discussed in Chapter 6.
 As mentioned, the configuration and control for an automotive engine control system are determined in part by the set of sensors that is available to measure the variables.
 As mentioned, the configuration and control for an automotive engine control system are determined in part by the set of sensors that is available to measure the variables.
5 is a form of overall engine electronic control at a very abstract level.
4: Generic electronic engine control system.
 Spark control determines when the airefuel mixture is ignited after it is compressed in the cylinders of the engine.
 In the exhaust system, there is a valve to control the amount of exhaust gas being re-circulated back to the input, and a catalytic converter to further control emissions.
 In the exhaust system, there is a valve to control the amount of exhaust gas being re-circulated back to the input, and a catalytic converter to further control emissions.
 At one stage of development, the electronic engine control consisted of separate subsystems for fuel control, spark control, and exhaust gas recirculation.
 At one stage of development, the electronic engine control consisted of separate subsystems for fuel control, spark control, and exhaust gas recirculation.
 At one stage of development, the electronic engine control consisted of separate subsystems for fuel control, spark control, and exhaust gas recirculation.
5 is shown as a separate control system, although engine control is evolving toward an integrated digital system (see Chapter 7).
5 is shown as a separate control system, although engine control is evolving toward an integrated digital system (see Chapter 7).
6 identifies the major physical quantities that are sensed and provided to the electronic controller as inputs.
5: Engine functions and control diagram.
6: Major controller inputs from engine.
7 identifies the major physical quantities that are outputs from the controller.
  Fuel metering control Ignition control (dwell and timing) Exhaust gas recirculation control Fuel tank evaporative emission control (EVAP)  This chapter discusses the various electronic engine control functions separately and explains how each function is implemented by a separate control system.
  Fuel metering control Ignition control (dwell and timing) Exhaust gas recirculation control Fuel tank evaporative emission control (EVAP)  This chapter discusses the various electronic engine control functions separately and explains how each function is implemented by a separate control system.
  Fuel metering control Ignition control (dwell and timing) Exhaust gas recirculation control Fuel tank evaporative emission control (EVAP)  This chapter discusses the various electronic engine control functions separately and explains how each function is implemented by a separate control system.
  Fuel metering control Ignition control (dwell and timing) Exhaust gas recirculation control Fuel tank evaporative emission control (EVAP)  This chapter discusses the various electronic engine control functions separately and explains how each function is implemented by a separate control system.
  Fuel metering control Ignition control (dwell and timing) Exhaust gas recirculation control Fuel tank evaporative emission control (EVAP)  This chapter discusses the various electronic engine control functions separately and explains how each function is implemented by a separate control system.
  Fuel metering control Ignition control (dwell and timing) Exhaust gas recirculation control Fuel tank evaporative emission control (EVAP)  This chapter discusses the various electronic engine control functions separately and explains how each function is implemented by a separate control system.
7: Major controller outputs to engine.
  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control  189  separate control systems are being integrated into one system and are implemented with digital electronics.
 Airflow into and out of the cylinder is controlled by poppet valves (simply called the valves here).
 It is these performance variables that are influenced by the electronic engine control.
 For an understanding of this controller influence, it is necessary to have the quantitative models for these performance variables as presented below.
 It is shown later in this chapter that electronic controls can optimize BSFC.
 In fact, the throttle is the control by the driver that determines the engine output power.
 As presently shown, Fi is determined by the fuelcontrol system to achieve certain engine performance requirements.
 This empirically determined volumetric efficiency is a convenient variable that can be used to characterize engine pumping efficiency during the development of a new engine control system and can also be used in fuel control of a production engine as explained later.
 This empirically determined volumetric efficiency is a convenient variable that can be used to characterize engine pumping efficiency during the development of a new engine control system and can also be used in fuel control of a production engine as explained later.
 With the new electronic control systems, calibration is determined by the electronic engine control system.
 With the new electronic control systems, calibration is determined by the electronic engine control system.
 As will be shown later in this chapter, electronic engine control systems are based upon microprocessors or microcontrollers.
 As will be shown later in this chapter, electronic engine control systems are based upon microprocessors or microcontrollers.
 Under program control, the engine control system determines the correct fuel delivery amount and the ignition timing as a function of driver command (via throttle setting) and other operating variables and parameters.
 Under program control, the engine control system determines the correct fuel delivery amount and the ignition timing as a function of driver command (via throttle setting) and other operating variables and parameters.
 As will also be shown below, an additional component of fuel delivery is determined from a closedloop portion of the control.
  Engine Mapping The development of any control system comes from knowledge of the plant, or system to be controlled.
  Engine Mapping The development of any control system comes from knowledge of the plant, or system to be controlled.
 Measurements are made of the important engine variables while quantities, such as the air/fuel ratio and the spark control, are varied in a known and systematic manner.
 Such engine mapping is done in engine test cells that have engine dynamometers and complex instrumentation that collects data under computer control.
 From the engine mapping a calibration table can be created of optimum values for later incorporation into the engine control system ROM as explained in Chapter 7.
 The control system  202  Chapter 5  designer can, if desired, select a control configuration, control variables, and control strategy that will satisfy all performance requirements (including stability) as computed from this model and that are within the other design limits such as cost, quality, and reliability.
 The control system  202  Chapter 5  designer can, if desired, select a control configuration, control variables, and control strategy that will satisfy all performance requirements (including stability) as computed from this model and that are within the other design limits such as cost, quality, and reliability.
 The control system  202  Chapter 5  designer can, if desired, select a control configuration, control variables, and control strategy that will satisfy all performance requirements (including stability) as computed from this model and that are within the other design limits such as cost, quality, and reliability.
 The control system  202  Chapter 5  designer can, if desired, select a control configuration, control variables, and control strategy that will satisfy all performance requirements (including stability) as computed from this model and that are within the other design limits such as cost, quality, and reliability.
 To understand a representative engine control system, it is instructive to consider the influence of control variables on engine performance and exhaust emissions.
 To understand a representative engine control system, it is instructive to consider the influence of control variables on engine performance and exhaust emissions.
 One specific air/fuel ratio is highly significant in electronic fuel-control systems, namely, the stoichiometric mixture.
 Emission control is strongly affected by air/fuel ratio, or by l.
 Unfortunately, for the purposes of controlling exhaust emissions, the NOx exhaust concentration increases with increasing air/fuel ratios.
 As will be explained, engine control strategy involves regulating fuel delivery at a stoichiometric mixture and varying ignition timing for optimized performance.
 However, there is yet another variable to be controlled, which assists the engine control system in meeting exhaust gas emission regulations.
 However, there is yet another variable to be controlled, which assists the engine control system in meeting exhaust gas emission regulations.
 However, by adding another control variable, the undesirable exhaust gas emission of NOx can be significantly reduced while maintaining a relatively high level of torque.
 This new control variable, exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), consists of recirculating a precisely controlled amount of exhaust gas into the intake.
 This new control variable, exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), consists of recirculating a precisely controlled amount of exhaust gas into the intake.
 The engine control configuration depicted in Figure 5.
5 shows that exhaust gas recirculation is a major subsystem of the overall control system.
  Exhaust Catalytic Converters It is the task of the electronic control system to set the calibration for each engine-operating condition.
 There are many possible control strategies for setting the variables for any given engine, and each tends to have its own advantages and disadvantages.
 However, this discussion is about a typical electronic control system that is highly representative of the systems for engines used by U.
 This is the type of system that is chosen for the typical electronic engine control system.
16) has been one of the more significant devices for controlling exhaust emissions since the era of emission control began.
16) has been one of the more significant devices for controlling exhaust emissions since the era of emission control began.
  The Three-Way Catalyst Another catalytic converter configuration that is extremely important for modern emission control systems is called the three-way catalyst (TWC).
) This ratio and the concept of stoichiometry is extremely important in an electronic fuel controller.
 In fact, the primary function of most modern electronic fuel-control systems is to maintain average air/fuel ratio at stoichiometry.
 Controlling the average air/fuel ratio to the tolerances of the TWC window (for the full life requirement) requires accurate measurement of mass airflow rate and precise fuel delivery and is the primary function of the electronic engine control system.
 A modern electronic fuelcontrol system can meet these precise fuel requirements.
  The fundamentals of any electronic engine control system are that it regulates the fuel/air mixture and ignition timing in response to an arbitrary driver input (via the throttle plate).
 The electronic engine control system directly determines a corresponding fuel quantity delivered to the engine which optimizes performance subject to a somewhat complex set of constraints.
 As explained above, there are other control variables (e.
  Electronic Fuel-Control System For an understanding of the configuration of an electronic fuel-control system, refer to the block diagram of Figure 5.
 The primary function of this fuel-control system is to determine the mass airflow rate accurately into the engine.
 Then the control system precisely regulates fuel delivery such that the ratio of the mass of air to the mass of fuel in each cylinder is as close as possible to stoichiometry (i.
19: Electronic fuel-control configuration.
  exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO) engine coolant sensor (ECS) engine position sensor (EPS) camshaft position sensor (CPS) exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR)  The EPS has the capability of measuring crankshaft angular speed (RPM) as well as crankshaft angular position when it is used in conjunction with a stable and precise electronic clock (in the controller) as explained in Chapter 6.
 The signals from the various sensors enable the controller to determine the correct fuel flow in relation to the airflow to obtain the stoichiometric mixture.
 In addition, optimum ignition timing is determined and appropriate timing pulses are sent to the ignition control module (IGN).
 This time is, in turn, computed in the engine controller to achieve the desired air/fuel ratio.
, near closed throttle), the control system must account for the relatively short opening and closing fuel injector dynamic transients response.
 The control system generates a pulsed electrical signal of sufficient amplitude to open the fuel injector valve.
 A practical fuel-control system maintains the average mixture at stoichiometry but has minor (relatively rapid) fluctuations about the average, as explained below.
 The electronic fuel-control system operates in two modes: open-loop and closed-loop.
 Recall the concepts for open-loop and closed-loop control as explained in Chapter 1.
 Then the fuel-control system determines the quantity of fuel (Mf) to be delivered to meet the required air/fuel ratio.
 In the closed-loop control mode (also called feedback), a measurement of the controlled variable is provided to the controller (i.
 In the closed-loop control mode (also called feedback), a measurement of the controlled variable is provided to the controller (i.
 In the closed-loop control mode (also called feedback), a measurement of the controlled variable is provided to the controller (i.
, it is fed back) such that an error signal between the actual and desired values of the controlled variable is obtained.
 Then the controller generates an actuating signal that tends to reduce the error to zero.
 In the case of fuel control, the desired variables to be measured are HC, CO, and NOx concentrations.
 There it is shown that the EGO has evolved since its introduction in the earliest electronic control systems.
 Such a sensor is appropriate for use in a limit-cycle type of closed-loop control.
 Although the EGO sensor is a switching-type sensor, it provides sufficient information to the controller to maintain the average air/fuel ratio over time at stoichiometry, thereby meeting the mixture requirements for optimum performance of the three-way catalytic converter.
 In a typical modern electronic fuel-control system, the fuel delivery is partly open-loop and partly closed-loop.
 This portion of the control sets the air/fuel ratio at approximately stoichiometry.
 They are discussed in Chapter 7, which explains the operation of a modern, practical digital electronic engine control system.
  Engine Control Sequence The step-by-step process of events in fuel control begins with engine start.
 Once the engine starts and until a specific set of conditions is satisfied, the engine control operates in the openloop mode.
 Once the EGO sensor has reached its operating temperature (typically a few seconds to about two minutes depending upon ambient conditions and the type of sensor used [see Chapter 6]), the EGO sensor signal is input to the controller and the system begins closedloop operation.
  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control  213  Open-Loop Control Fuel control for an electronically controlled engine operates open-loop any time the conditions are not met for closed-loop operation.
  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control  213  Open-Loop Control Fuel control for an electronically controlled engine operates open-loop any time the conditions are not met for closed-loop operation.
 The mass airflow rate measurement in combination with RPM permits computation (by the engine controller) of the mass of air (Ma) drawn into each cylinder during intake for each engine cycle.
 The correct fuel mass (Mf) that is injected with the intake air is computed by the electronic controller: Mf ¼ rfa Ma  (24)  where rfa is the desired ratio of fuel to air.
 Theoretically, if there were no changes to the engine, the sensors, or the fuel injector, an engine control system could operate open-loop at all times.
 In practice, owing to errors in the calculation of Ma, variations in manufactured components, as well as to factors such as wear, the open-loop control would not be able to maintain the mixture at the desired air/fuel ratio if it were used alone.
 In order to maintain the very precise air/fuel mixture ratio required for emission control over the full life of the vehicle, the engine controller is operated in closed-loop mode for as much of the time as possible.
 In order to maintain the very precise air/fuel mixture ratio required for emission control over the full life of the vehicle, the engine controller is operated in closed-loop mode for as much of the time as possible.
 Compensation for the open-loop mode variations above is possible via adaptive closed-loop control as explained in Chapter 7.
20, the control system in closed-loop mode operates as follows.
 For any given set of operating conditions, the fuel metering actuator provides fuel flow to produce an air/fuel ratio set by the controller output.
20: Simplified typical closed-loop fuel-control system block diagram.
  a feedback signal for the controller input that depends on the exhaust gas oxygen concentration.
 One closed-loop control scheme that has been used in practice (i.
, limit-cycle control) results in the air/fuel ratio cycling around the desired set point of stoichiometry.
 The important parameters for this type of control include the amplitude and frequency of excursion away from the desired stoichiometric set point.
 The parameters V1 and V2 are derived from the pair of actual EGO sensor voltages for l < 1 and l > 1 (see Chapter 6) and are approximately V1 x:55; V2 x:45 Although there are many potential control strategies for a switching-type sensor such as the EGO sensor, we will illustrate with a relatively straightforward example.
 Any control system incorporating a switching sensor (as characterized by the above model) will operate in a form of limit-cycle type of operation.
 As explained above, the fuel delivered to any given cylinder by its fuel injector during the kth engine cycle (Mf(k)) is proportional to the time interval (sF (k)) of its binary-valued control electrical signal VF(k) (see Figure 5.
 In our present example controller, the fuel injector (i.
, actuator) control voltage is given by VF ðkÞ ¼ V ¼0  tk;n  t < tk;n þ sF ðkÞ tk;n þ sF ðkÞ < t < tkþ1;n  (26)  where tk,n is the injection time during kth engine cycle for the nth cylinder.
 We illustrate the operation of this example fuel-control system in Figure 5.
 Reduced to its essential features, the engine control system operates as a limit-cycle controller in which the air/fuel ratio cycles up and down about the set point of stoichiometry, as shown by the idealized waveforms in Figure 5.
 Reduced to its essential features, the engine control system operates as a limit-cycle controller in which the air/fuel ratio cycles up and down about the set point of stoichiometry, as shown by the idealized waveforms in Figure 5.
 Whenever the EGO output voltage level indicates a lean mixture, the controller causes the air/fuel ratio to decrease, that is, to change in the direction of a rich mixture.
 On the other hand, whenever the EGO sensor output voltage indicates a rich mixture, the controller changes the air/fuel ratio in the direction of a lean mixture.
 The electronic fuel controller changes the mixture by changing the duration of the actuating signal to each fuel injector.
21: Simplified waveforms in a closed-loop fuel-control system.
 The controller causes the pulse duration (Figure 5.
 At this point the controller begins increasing the actuating time interval to tend toward a rich mixture.
 This increasing actuator interval continues until the EGO sensor switches high, causing the controller to decrease the fuel injector actuating interval.
 The engine controller continuously computes the desired fuel injector actuation duration and maintains the current value in memory.
 At the appropriate time in the intake cycle, the controller reads the value of the fuel injector duration and generates a pulse of the correct duration to activate the proper fuel injector for the computed time interval sF.
 The controller continuously computes the average of the EGO sensor voltage.
 In the simplest case, the average EGO sensor voltage VEGO should be halfway between the rich and the lean values: VEGO ¼  Vrich þ Vlean 2  (29)  Whenever this condition is not met, the controller adapts its computation of pulse duration (from EGO sensor voltage) to achieve the desired average stoichiometric mixture.
 Chapter 7 explains this adaptive control in more detail than is given here.
 Frequency and deviation of the fuel controller Recall from Chapter 1 that a limit-cycle controller regulates a system between two limits and that it has an oscillatory behavior; that is, the control variable oscillates about the set point or the desired value for the variable.
 Frequency and deviation of the fuel controller Recall from Chapter 1 that a limit-cycle controller regulates a system between two limits and that it has an oscillatory behavior; that is, the control variable oscillates about the set point or the desired value for the variable.
 Frequency and deviation of the fuel controller Recall from Chapter 1 that a limit-cycle controller regulates a system between two limits and that it has an oscillatory behavior; that is, the control variable oscillates about the set point or the desired value for the variable.
 The simplified fuel-controller operates in a limit-cycle mode and, as shown in Figure 5.
 The two end limits are determined by the rich and lean voltage levels of the EGO sensor, by the controller, and by the characteristics of the fuel metering actuator.
  218  Chapter 5  The frequency of oscillation fL of this limit-cycle control system is defined as the reciprocal of its period.
 In addition, the limit-cycle frequency and deviation in a practical engine control are influenced by hysteresis in the transfer characteristics VF (l) for an actual EGO sensor as discussed in Chapter 7.
 The parameters of the control system are adjusted such that at the worst case the deviation is within the required acceptable limits for the TWC used.
  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control  219  The preceding discussion applies only to a simplified idealized fuel-control system.
 Chapter 7 explains the operation of practical electronic fuel-control systems in which the calculation of fuel injector duration is done numerically in a microprocessor-based engine control system.
 Chapter 7 explains the operation of practical electronic fuel-control systems in which the calculation of fuel injector duration is done numerically in a microprocessor-based engine control system.
  Analysis of Intake Manifold Pressure As explained earlier, fuel control is based on a measurement of mass airflow rate and on regulation of fuel flow to maintain a desired air/fuel ratio.
 For a control system application, only average manifold pressure is required.
 The rapid fluctuations in instantaneous MAP are not of interest to the engine controller.
 Of course, electronic filtering of the MAP sensor voltage is also possible as explained in Chapter 1  Measuring Air Mass A critically important aspect of fuel control is the requirement to measure the mass of air that is drawn into the cylinder (i.
 throttle angle and RPM can be stored in memory for retrieval during a calculation of M_ a in the engine controller.
 Thus, via measurement and table look-up, the engine control has sufficient data to calculate (or at least to closely estimate) M_ a from which fuel delivery quantities are readily computed.
 The control strategy for regulating VVP is explained in Chapter 7.
 Including EGR Calculating V_ i is relatively straightforward in a computer-based control system.
 The control system continuously calculates M_ a from V_ a and ra at the temperature and manifold pressure involved, and generates an output electrical signal to operate the fuel injectors to produce a stoichiometric mass fuel rate.
 For a practical engine control system, it completes such a measurement, computation, and control signal generation at least once for each cylinder firing.
 For a practical engine control system, it completes such a measurement, computation, and control signal generation at least once for each cylinder firing.
 The electronic fuel control regulates fuel flow to maintain stoichiometry as long as the engine is fully warmed and may briefly regulate fuel to somewhat richer than stoichiometry during cold starts.
 Normally the electronic engine control is intended to operate the engine at a fixed RPM regardless of load.
 For either method an actuator is required to enable the electronic engine control system to regulate the idle mass airflow rate.
 Chapter 6 discusses various actuators having application for idle airflow control.
 (Note: In the following analysis, the subscript I is included for all variables and parameters to emphasize that the present system refers to idle speed control.
 It is also necessary for this discussion of idle speed control to have a model for the relationship between indicated torque and engine angular speed at idle.
 Using the Laplace transform methods of Chapter 1, it is possible to obtain the engine transfer function at idle HeI (s): HeI ðsÞ ¼ ¼  UI ðsÞ Ti ðsÞ  (43)  1 J e s þ Re  (44)  Similarly, the transfer function for the idle speed actuator dynamics HaI (s) is given by HaI ðsÞ ¼  xI ðsÞ uðsÞ  Ka ¼ 2 mI ðs þ 2zI uI s þ uI 2 Þ  (45)  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control where uI ¼  227  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ kI =mI  zI ¼  dI 2mI uI  These transfer functions can be combined to yield the transfer function (in standard form) of the idle speed control “plant” HpI (s): HpI ðsÞ ¼  Ka Km KI    ¼  UI ðsÞ uðsÞ    s2 þ 2zuI þ uI  Je mI  (46)  Re sþ Je    (47)  where u is the control variable that is sent to the actuator.
 Using the Laplace transform methods of Chapter 1, it is possible to obtain the engine transfer function at idle HeI (s): HeI ðsÞ ¼ ¼  UI ðsÞ Ti ðsÞ  (43)  1 J e s þ Re  (44)  Similarly, the transfer function for the idle speed actuator dynamics HaI (s) is given by HaI ðsÞ ¼  xI ðsÞ uðsÞ  Ka ¼ 2 mI ðs þ 2zI uI s þ uI 2 Þ  (45)  The Basics of Electronic Engine Control where uI ¼  227  pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ kI =mI  zI ¼  dI 2mI uI  These transfer functions can be combined to yield the transfer function (in standard form) of the idle speed control “plant” HpI (s): HpI ðsÞ ¼  Ka Km KI    ¼  UI ðsÞ uðsÞ    s2 þ 2zuI þ uI  Je mI  (46)  Re sþ Je    (47)  where u is the control variable that is sent to the actuator.
 Open-loop control of idle speed is not practical owing to the large variations in load as well as parameter changes due to variations in operating environmental conditions.
 On the other hand, closed-loop control is well suited to regulating idle speed to a desired value.
26 is a block diagram of such an idle speed control system.
 Using the analysis procedures of Chapter 1 and denoting the idle speed set point Us, it can be shown that the idle speed control closed-loop transfer function HCLI is given by HCLI ðsÞ ¼  UI ðsÞ Us ðsÞ  (48)  HcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ ¼ 1 þ Hs ðsÞHcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ  Ωs  +  Є –  idle control system HcI(s)  u  actuator  xI  engine (plant)  HaI(s)  HeI(s)  engine speed sensor Hs(s)  Figure 5.
 Using the analysis procedures of Chapter 1 and denoting the idle speed set point Us, it can be shown that the idle speed control closed-loop transfer function HCLI is given by HCLI ðsÞ ¼  UI ðsÞ Us ðsÞ  (48)  HcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ ¼ 1 þ Hs ðsÞHcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ  Ωs  +  Є –  idle control system HcI(s)  u  actuator  xI  engine (plant)  HaI(s)  HeI(s)  engine speed sensor Hs(s)  Figure 5.
26: Idle speed control system block diagram.
  ΩI  228  Chapter 5  where HcI is the transfer function for the idle speed controller and Hs(s) the transfer function for the crankshaft speed sensor.
 In Chapter 1, there were three control strategies introduced: P, PI, and PID.
 It was also shown in Chapter 1 that a proportionaleintegral (PI) control had zero steady-state error but could potentially yield an unstable closed-loop system.
 However, depending upon the system parameters there are ranges of values for both the proportional gain (Kp) and integral gain (KI) for which stable operation is possible and for which the idle speed control system has acceptable performance.
 The controller transfer function for PI control is given by   KI s þ s0 (49) HcI ðsÞ ¼ Kp þ ¼ Kp s s For the purpose of illustrating exemplary idle speed control performance, we assume the following set of parameters: zI ¼ 0:5 uI ¼ 25 rad=sec ue ¼ Re =Je ¼ 10rad=sec Knum ¼ Ka Km KI ¼ 250 Kden ¼ Je mI ¼ 0:05 s0 ¼ KI =Kp ¼ 10 The forward transfer function HF (s) is defined by the following expression: HF ðsÞ ¼ HcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ ¼  Knum ðs þ s0 Þ Kden ½ðs3 þ 2 zuI s2 þ u 2I sÞðs þ ue Þ  (50)  The present analysis is simplified by assuming a perfect angular speed sensor such that Hs(s) ¼ 1.
 The controller transfer function for PI control is given by   KI s þ s0 (49) HcI ðsÞ ¼ Kp þ ¼ Kp s s For the purpose of illustrating exemplary idle speed control performance, we assume the following set of parameters: zI ¼ 0:5 uI ¼ 25 rad=sec ue ¼ Re =Je ¼ 10rad=sec Knum ¼ Ka Km KI ¼ 250 Kden ¼ Je mI ¼ 0:05 s0 ¼ KI =Kp ¼ 10 The forward transfer function HF (s) is defined by the following expression: HF ðsÞ ¼ HcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ ¼  Knum ðs þ s0 Þ Kden ½ðs3 þ 2 zuI s2 þ u 2I sÞðs þ ue Þ  (50)  The present analysis is simplified by assuming a perfect angular speed sensor such that Hs(s) ¼ 1.
 The controller transfer function for PI control is given by   KI s þ s0 (49) HcI ðsÞ ¼ Kp þ ¼ Kp s s For the purpose of illustrating exemplary idle speed control performance, we assume the following set of parameters: zI ¼ 0:5 uI ¼ 25 rad=sec ue ¼ Re =Je ¼ 10rad=sec Knum ¼ Ka Km KI ¼ 250 Kden ¼ Je mI ¼ 0:05 s0 ¼ KI =Kp ¼ 10 The forward transfer function HF (s) is defined by the following expression: HF ðsÞ ¼ HcI ðsÞHpI ðsÞ ¼  Knum ðs þ s0 Þ Kden ½ðs3 þ 2 zuI s2 þ u 2I sÞðs þ ue Þ  (50)  The present analysis is simplified by assuming a perfect angular speed sensor such that Hs(s) ¼ 1.
 In this case, the closed-loop idle speed control transfer function (HCLI (s)) is given by Kp HF ðsÞ (51) HCLI ðsÞ ¼ 1 þ Kp HF ðsÞ The influence of proportional gain on stability of this closed-loop idle speed control can be evaluated via root locus techniques as explained in Chapter 1.
 In this case, the closed-loop idle speed control transfer function (HCLI (s)) is given by Kp HF ðsÞ (51) HCLI ðsÞ ¼ 1 þ Kp HF ðsÞ The influence of proportional gain on stability of this closed-loop idle speed control can be evaluated via root locus techniques as explained in Chapter 1.
27 is a plot of the root locus for this idle speed control with the assumed parameters.
27: Root locus for idle speed control.
 The parameters used in this idle speed control simulation are not necessarily representative of any particular engine.
 Rather they have been chosen to illustrate characteristics of this important engine control function.
 In Chapter 7 where digital engine (powertrain) control is discussed, a discrete time control is modeled.
 In Chapter 7 where digital engine (powertrain) control is discussed, a discrete time control is modeled.
28: Step response of idle speed control.
 The spark advance (relative to TDC) is determined in the electronic engine control based on a number of measurements made by sensors.
 However, in order to generate a spark at the correct spark advance, the electronic engine control must have a measurement of the crankshaft angular position within an engine cycle.
 Based on measurements from the sensors for engine position, mass airflow or manifold pressure, and RPM, the electronic controller computes the correct spark advance for each cylinder.
 At the appropriate time, the controller sends a trigger signal to the driver circuits, thereby initiating spark.
 Before proceeding with a discussion of contemporary discrete-time digital control of the complete powertrain, however, it is necessary to explain and develop models for the critically important components of a control system: sensors and actuators.
 Before proceeding with a discussion of contemporary discrete-time digital control of the complete powertrain, however, it is necessary to explain and develop models for the critically important components of a control system: sensors and actuators.
  233  234  234  Chapter 6  The previous chapter introduced two critically important components found in any electronic control system: sensors and actuators.
 In any control system, sensors provide measurements of important plant variables in a format suitable for the digital microcontroller.
 In any control system, sensors provide measurements of important plant variables in a format suitable for the digital microcontroller.
 Similarly, actuators are electrically operated devices that regulate inputs to the plant that directly controls its output.
 For example, as we shall see, fuel injectors are electrically driven actuators that regulate the flow of fuel into an engine for engine control applications.
 Recall from Chapter 1 that fundamentally an electronic control system uses measurements of the plant variable being regulated in the closed-loop mode of operation.
 In the closed-loop mode, the electronic controller generates output electrical signals that regulate inputs to the plant in such a way as to reduce the error to zero.
 In the open-loop mode, it uses measurements of the key input variable to calculate the desired control variable.
 For either control or instrumentation applications, such measurements are made using one or more sensors.
 However, since control applications of sensors demand more accurate sensor performance models, the following discussion of sensors will focus on control applications.
 However, since control applications of sensors demand more accurate sensor performance models, the following discussion of sensors will focus on control applications.
 As will be shown throughout the remainder of this book, automotive electronics has many examples of electronic control in virtually every subsystem.
 Modern automotive electronic control systems use microcontrollers based on microprocessors (as explained in Chapter 4) to implement almost all control functions.
 Modern automotive electronic control systems use microcontrollers based on microprocessors (as explained in Chapter 4) to implement almost all control functions.
 Modern automotive electronic control systems use microcontrollers based on microprocessors (as explained in Chapter 4) to implement almost all control functions.
  Automotive Control System Applications of Sensors and Actuators In any control system application, sensors and actuators are in many cases the critical components for determining system performance.
 This is especially true for automotive control system applications.
 The availability of appropriate sensors and actuators dictates the design of the control system and the type of function it can perform.
 The sensors and actuators that are available to a control system designer are not always what the designer wants, because the ideal device may not be commercially available at acceptable  Sensors and Actuators  235  costs.
 For this reason, special signal processors or interface circuits often are designed to adapt an available sensor or actuator, or the control system is designed in a specific way to fit available sensors or actuators.
 However, because of the large potential production run for automotive control systems, it is often worthwhile to develop a sensor for a particular application, even though it may take a long and expensive research project to do so.
 Although there are many subsystems on automobiles that operate with sensors and actuators, we begin our discussion with a survey of the devices for powertrain control.
 To motivate the discussion of engine control sensors and actuators, it is helpful to review the variables measured (sensors) and the controlled variables (actuators).
 To motivate the discussion of engine control sensors and actuators, it is helpful to review the variables measured (sensors) and the controlled variables (actuators).
1 is a simplified block diagram of a representative electronic engine control system illustrating most of the relevant sensors used for engine control.
1 is a simplified block diagram of a representative electronic engine control system illustrating most of the relevant sensors used for engine control.
 As explained in Chapter 5, the position of the throttle plate, sensed by the throttle position sensor (TPS), directly regulates the airflow into the engine, thereby controlling output power.
 A set of fuel injectors (one for each cylinder) delivers the correct amount of fuel to a corresponding cylinder during the intake stroke under control of the electronic engine controller to maintain the fuel/air mixture at stoichiometry within a narrow tolerance band.
 A set of fuel injectors (one for each cylinder) delivers the correct amount of fuel to a corresponding cylinder during the intake stroke under control of the electronic engine controller to maintain the fuel/air mixture at stoichiometry within a narrow tolerance band.
 The ignition control system fires each spark plug at the appropriate time under control of the electronic engine controller.
 The ignition control system fires each spark plug at the appropriate time under control of the electronic engine controller.
 The ignition control system fires each spark plug at the appropriate time under control of the electronic engine controller.
 The exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) is controlled by yet another output from the engine controller.
 The exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) is controlled by yet another output from the engine controller.
 All critical engine control functions are based on measurements made by various sensors connected to the engine in an appropriate way.
 Computations made within the engine controller based on these inputs yield output signals to the actuators.
 We consider inputs (sensors) to the control system first, and then we will discuss the outputs (actuators).
1: Representative electronic engine control system.
  COOLANT TEMPERATURE SENSOR  EGR  236  Chapter 6  Variables to be Measured The set of variables sensed for any given powertrain is specific to the associated engine control configuration.
 Space limitations for this book preclude a complete survey of all powertrain control systems and relevant sensor and actuator selections for all car models.
 Nevertheless, it is possible to review a superset of possible sensors, which is done in this chapter, and to present representative examples of practical digital control configurations, which is done in the next chapter.
 The superset of variables sensed in engine control includes the following: 1.
  In addition to measurements of the above variables, engine control is also based on the status of the vehicle as monitored by a set of switches.
  Airflow Rate Sensor In Chapter 5, we showed that the correct operation of an electronically controlled engine operating with government-regulated exhaust emissions requires a measurement of the mass flow rate of air ðM_ a Þ into the engine.
 It is this quasi-steady component of M_ a ðtÞ that is measured by the MAF for engine control purposes.
 Of course, in practice with a digital powertrain control system, mass airflow measurements are sampled at discrete times and the filtering is implemented as a discrete time transformation of the sampled data (see Chapter 2).
 Fortunately, a modern digital engine controller can convert the analog bridge output voltage directly to mass airflow by simple computation.
 As will be shown in Chapter 7, in which digital engine control is discussed, it is necessary to  Figure 6.
 The engine control system can calculate M_ a from vo using the known functional relationship vo ðM_ a Þ.
 Since the sensor strain is proportional to pressure, the output voltage is also proportional to the applied pressure: Vo ¼ GA  VS R˛ KD p Ro  This pressure signal can be input to the digital control system via sampling and an analog-todigital converter (see Chapter 2).
  Engine Crankshaft Angular Position Sensor Another important measurement for electronic engine control is the angular position of the crankshaft relative to a reference position.
 The principles involved in measuring rotating shafts can be illustrated by one of the most significant applications for engine control: the measurement of crankshaft angular position or angular velocity (i.
 This information is used by the electronic engine controller to set ignition timing and, in most cases, to set the fuel injector pulse timing.
 In automobiles with electronic engine control systems, angular position qe can be sensed on the crankshaft directly or on the camshaft.
 Either of these sensing locations can be used in electronic control systems.
 In principle, it is sufficient for engine control purposes to measure crankshaft/camshaft position at a small number of fixed points.
 In general, there are N tabs where N is determined during the design of the engine control system.
 In any control system employing a sensor such as that of Figure 6.
 The precise timing requirements of modern digital engine control require that some compensation be made for the slight variation in timing reference of this sensor due to its source impedance.
 The exact variation with RPM can be determined empirically such that compensation for this error can be done in the electronic engine control system.
 Any compensation for this error via calculation in the digital engine control system is a unique process for any specific sensor/signal processing configuration.
 Engine angular speed sensor An engine angular speed sensor is needed to provide an input for the electronic controller for several functions.
 Thus, a measurement of the time between any pair of successive zero crossings of vo can be used by a digital controller to calculate crankshaft angular speed.
 A high-frequency clock is a required component for the operation of a microprocessor/microcontroller as described in Chapter 4.
 The contents of the binary counter will contain the binary equivalent of Bc where Bc ¼ fc ðtnþ1  tn Þ  (42)  Then, in one scheme, the time from tnþ1 to tnþ2 can be used for the digital control to access Bc for later computation of ue.
 The ZCD pulse can be used to control an electronic switch (gate) to alternately supply oscillator pulses to the binary counter or stop the counting.
 The ZCD, gate and counter can be implemented by ad hoc dedicated circuitry or within the controller/microprocessor (see Chapter 4).
 This generates a pulse in the sensor output voltage vo that can be used in electronic control systems for timing purposes.
  Throttle Angle Sensor Still another variable that must be measured for electronic engine control is the throttle plate angular position.
 Measurement of the instantaneous throttle angle is important for control purposes, as will be explained in Chapter 7.
 For digital engine control, the voltage V(a) must be converted to digital format using an analog-to-digital converter.
 In the operation of an electronic fuel control system it is vital to know the temperature of the coolant, the temperature of the inlet air, and the temperature of the exhaust gas oxygen sensor (a sensor to be discussed in the next section).
 Combining equations 59 and 60 yields the following equation for temperature T: T ¼ A=fB þ ‘n ½VT R=ðV  VT Þg  (60)  270  Chapter 6  The terminal voltage VT is input to the digital engine control system (e.
, feedforward) control.
 Next, we consider sensors that are appropriate for feedback engine control.
 Recall from Chapter 5 that feedback control for fuel delivery is based on maintaining the air/fuel ratio at stoichiometry (i.
 The primary sensor for fuel control is the exhaust gas oxygen sensor.
 Desirable EGO characteristics The EGO sensor characteristics that are desirable for the type of limit-cycle fuel control system that was discussed in Chapter 5 are as follows: 1.
  Switching characteristics The switching time for the EGO sensor also must be considered in control applications.
 An ideal characteristic for a limit-cycle controller is shown in Figure 6.
 A model for the ideal EGO sensor was used in Chapter 5 for explaining closed-loop fuel control in which the hysteresis was taken to be negligible.
 Under certain conditions, the fuel control using an EGO sensor will be operated in open-loop mode and for other conditions it will be operated in closed-loop mode (as will be explained in Chapter 7).
 The EGO sensor should not be used for control at temperatures below about 300  C because the difference between rich and lean voltages decreases rapidly with temperature in this region.
 This important property of the sensor is partly responsible for the requirement to operate the fuel control system in the open-loop mode at low exhaust  274  Chapter 6 1000MV  LEAN-TO-RICH  V0  RICH-TO-LEAN  0MV 100MS a.
 As we have seen, the signal from the oxygen sensor is not useful for closed-loop control until the sensor has reached a temperature of about 300  C.
  Knock Sensors Another sensor having applications in closed-loop engine control is the so-called knock sensor.
 As will be explained in Chapter 7, one way of controlling knocking is to sense when knocking begins and then retard the ignition until the knocking stops.
 A key to the control loop for this method is a knock sensor.
  Automotive Engine Control Actuators In addition to the set of sensors, electronic engine control is critically dependent on a set of actuators to control air/fuel ratio, ignition, and EGR.
  Automotive Engine Control Actuators In addition to the set of sensors, electronic engine control is critically dependent on a set of actuators to control air/fuel ratio, ignition, and EGR.
, from the engine controller) and produces an output of a different physical form (e.
 The solenoid is used in applications ranging from precise fuel control to mundane applications such as electric door locks.
 With no control voltage applied (i.
 The control current that operates the fuel injector is pulsed on and off to deliver precise quantities of fuel.
 The control voltage V depicted in Figure 6.
31 is the terminal voltage applied to the fuel injector by the electronic engine control system.
 For a pulse train fuel injector control voltage signal, the ratio of “on” time t to the period of the pulse T (“on” time plus “off” time) is called  286  Chapter 6  Figure 6.
 The amount of EGR is regulated by the engine controller, as explained in Chapter 7.
 When the correct amount of EGR has been determined by the controller based on  Sensors and Actuators  287  Figure 6.
  measurements from the various engine control sensors, the controller sends an electrical signal to the EGR actuator.
  measurements from the various engine control sensors, the controller sends an electrical signal to the EGR actuator.
 The vacuum that operates the diaphragm is supplied by the intake manifold and is controlled by a solenoid-operated valve.
 This solenoid valve is controlled by the output of the control system.
 This solenoid valve is controlled by the output of the control system.
, by current supplied by the control system flowing through the coil), the EGR valve is opened by the applied vacuum.
 This pressure is regulated by pulsing the solenoid with a variable-duty cycle  288  Chapter 6  electrical control current.
 The duty cycle (see discussion on fuel injectors) of this pulsing current controls the average pressure in the chamber that affects the diaphragm deflection, thereby regulating the amount of EGR.
 After a considerable development period, various mechanisms have come into production automotive engines for varying valve phasing under electronic control.
 The optimum overlap varies with operating conditions, and electronic control (with a suitable actuator) is required to achieve this optimum.
 The axial displacement of the helical gear is regulated by a variable-duty-cycle solenoid-activated control valve that is itself regulated by the engine electronic control system.
 The axial displacement of the helical gear is regulated by a variable-duty-cycle solenoid-activated control valve that is itself regulated by the engine electronic control system.
 By regulating the axial displacement of the helical gear, the engine control system controls the relative phasing of the exhaust and intake camshafts.
 By regulating the axial displacement of the helical gear, the engine control system controls the relative phasing of the exhaust and intake camshafts.
 The VVP control comes from the electronic engine control unit (ECU) in the form of currents iA and iR.
 The VVP control comes from the electronic engine control unit (ECU) in the form of currents iA and iR.
 This model is used in Chapter 7 to explain the operation of the VVP under powertrain control.
 The corresponding torque acting on the camshaft is negative and given by Tc ¼ kc dR  iR nonzero  (79)  With proper design, such a system can be modeled as a linear actuator in the following form: Tc ¼ kc u  (80)  where u is the control signal from electronic engine control system: ¼ dA ¼ dR  iA nonzero iR nonzero  (81)  The torque applied to the camshaft results in dynamic angular movement of the camshaft fc(t) measured relative to the camshaft drive gear (G see Figure 6.
 The corresponding torque acting on the camshaft is negative and given by Tc ¼ kc dR  iR nonzero  (79)  With proper design, such a system can be modeled as a linear actuator in the following form: Tc ¼ kc u  (80)  where u is the control signal from electronic engine control system: ¼ dA ¼ dR  iA nonzero iR nonzero  (81)  The torque applied to the camshaft results in dynamic angular movement of the camshaft fc(t) measured relative to the camshaft drive gear (G see Figure 6.
 The VVP actuator mechanism can now be modeled as a transfer function Hp(s), which is given by Hp ¼  fc ðsÞ uðsÞ  ka ¼ sðs þ so Þ  (84)  where ka ¼  kc Jc  so ¼  Bc Jc  Parameters for a hypothetical VVP mechanism are as follows: ka ¼ 2600 so ¼ 17 The transfer function Hp(s) is the plant for a VVP control system that is incorporated as a function in the engine/powertrain control system for an engine with VVP.
 The VVP actuator mechanism can now be modeled as a transfer function Hp(s), which is given by Hp ¼  fc ðsÞ uðsÞ  ka ¼ sðs þ so Þ  (84)  where ka ¼  kc Jc  so ¼  Bc Jc  Parameters for a hypothetical VVP mechanism are as follows: ka ¼ 2600 so ¼ 17 The transfer function Hp(s) is the plant for a VVP control system that is incorporated as a function in the engine/powertrain control system for an engine with VVP.
 The electronic control for this VVP is described and analyzed in Chapter 7.
 Motors have also been employed to raise or lower windows, position seats as well as for actuators on airflow control at idle (see Chapter 7).
 However, it does require that the control system incorporates solid-state power switching electronics to be able to handle the necessary currents.
 Moreover, it requires precise control of the excitation current.
 Chapter 7 discusses the control of an induction motor that is used in a hybrid electric vehicle.
 A simplified block diagram of the two-pole motor control system for the motor of Figure 6.
 A controller determines the time for switching currents Ia and Ib on as well as the duration.
 The duration of this current is regulated by controller C to produce the desired power (as commanded by the driver).
 After rotating approximately 90 , current Ib is switched on by activating transistor B via a signal sent by controller C.
 This speed is determined by the mechanical load on the motor and the power commanded by the controller.
 As the power command is increased, the controller responds by increasing the duration of the current pulse supplied to each stator coil.
 Chapter 7 discusses the application of a stepper motor in an engine idle speed control system.
 Very precise angular position control is obtained for a stepper motor by the number and relative phasing of pairs of such pulses.
 A control system can advance the load placed on the stepper motor-gear system by a specified amount via the number of output pulses sent to the motor.
 This is the subsystem that receives the electrical signal from the engine controller and delivers as its output the spark that ignites the mixture during the end of the compression stroke.
 The engine control unit (ECU) controls the operation of the ignition system via a control signal (eb) that is applied to the base of transistor Q.
 The engine control unit (ECU) controls the operation of the ignition system via a control signal (eb) that is applied to the base of transistor Q.
 The engine control unit (ECU) controls the operation of the ignition system via a control signal (eb) that is applied to the base of transistor Q.
 Using the Laplace transform methods of Chapter 1, the current Ip through the coil (equal to the collector current) primary can be shown to be Ip ðtÞ ¼  Vb 1  et=sc Ron  where sc ¼ Lp =Ron Normally, the ECU will generate a control signal eb of sufficient duration that Ip has essentially reached the steady-state value of Vb/Ron.
 The duration of this control signal is known as “dwell.
 At this time, the ECU switches off the control signal and the coil primary current drops rapidly to 0.
 With the background in sensors and actuators from this chapter, it is now possible to discuss the various automotive control systems.
 With the advent of electronic controls, the powertrain also includes the electronic control system (in whatever configuration it has).
 With the advent of electronic controls, the powertrain also includes the electronic control system (in whatever configuration it has).
 In addition to engine control functions for emissions regulation, fuel economy, and performance, electronic controls are also used in the automatic transmission to select shifting as a function of operating conditions.
 In addition to engine control functions for emissions regulation, fuel economy, and performance, electronic controls are also used in the automatic transmission to select shifting as a function of operating conditions.
 Moreover, certain vehicles employ electronically controlled clutches in the differential (transaxle) for traction control.
 Moreover, certain vehicles employ electronically controlled clutches in the differential (transaxle) for traction control.
 Electronic controls for these major powertrain components can be either separate (i.
 This latter integrated control system has the benefit of obtaining optimal vehicle performance within the constraints of exhaust emission and fuel economy regulations.
 Each of the control systems is discussed separately beginning with electronic engine control.
 Each of the control systems is discussed separately beginning with electronic engine control.
 This chapter concludes with a discussion of hybrid, electric vehicle (HEV) control systems in which propulsive power comes from an IC engine or an electric motor, or a combination of both.
  Digital Engine Control Chapter 5 discussed some of the fundamental issues involved in electronic engine control.
 This chapter explores some practical digital control systems.
 There is, of course, considerable variation in the configuration and control concept from one manufacturer to another.
 However, this chapter describes representative control systems that are not necessarily based on the system of any given manufacturer, thereby giving the reader an understanding of the configuration and operating principles of a generic representative system.
 In Chapter 5, engine control was discussed with respect to continuous time representation.
 In fact, modern engine control systems, such as the ones discussed in this chapter, are digital.
 A typical engine control system incorporates a microprocessor and is essentially a specialpurpose computer (or microcontroller).
 A typical engine control system incorporates a microprocessor and is essentially a specialpurpose computer (or microcontroller).
 Electronic engine control has evolved from a relatively rudimentary fuel control system employing discrete analog components to the highly precise fuel and ignition control achieved through microprocessor-based integrated digital electronic powertrain control.
 Electronic engine control has evolved from a relatively rudimentary fuel control system employing discrete analog components to the highly precise fuel and ignition control achieved through microprocessor-based integrated digital electronic powertrain control.
 Electronic engine control has evolved from a relatively rudimentary fuel control system employing discrete analog components to the highly precise fuel and ignition control achieved through microprocessor-based integrated digital electronic powertrain control.
 Electronic engine control has evolved from a relatively rudimentary fuel control system employing discrete analog components to the highly precise fuel and ignition control achieved through microprocessor-based integrated digital electronic powertrain control.
 The motivation for development of the more sophisticated digital control systems has been the increasingly stringent exhaust emission and fuel economy regulations that have evolved  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  311  recently.
 It has proven to be cost effective to implement the powertrain controller as a multimode computer-based system to satisfy these requirements.
 A multimode controller operates in one of many possible modes, and, among other tasks, changes the various calibration parameters as operating conditions change in order to optimize performance.
 To implement multimode control in analog electronics, it would be necessary to change hardware parameters (for example, via switching systems) to accommodate various operating conditions.
 In a computer-based controller, however, the control law and system parameters are changed via program (i.
 In a computer-based controller, however, the control law and system parameters are changed via program (i.
, software) control.
 The hardware remains fixed but the software is reconfigured in accordance with operating conditions as determined by sensor measurements and switch inputs to the controller.
 This chapter will explain how the microcontroller under program control is responsible for generating the electrical signals that operate the fuel injectors and trigger the ignition pulses.
 This chapter will explain how the microcontroller under program control is responsible for generating the electrical signals that operate the fuel injectors and trigger the ignition pulses.
 This chapter also discusses secondary functions (including management of secondary air that must be provided to the catalytic converter, EGR regulation, and evaporative emission control) that have not been discussed in detail before.
 Ts ¼ sample time  (1)  The time interval between successive sample times is the period during which the control system performs the necessary computations to perform its function.
 However, as explained in Chapter 5, the majority of automotive control or instrumentation systems employ some analog sensors and actuators (or in the instrumentation case, displays).
 When representing the sampled data from a continuous time sensor having an output terminal voltage V0(t) the notation used here to represent the kth sample of V0 is Vk where Vk ¼ V0 ðtk Þ  (2)  It is, perhaps, worthwhile at this point to illustrate the operation of a digital control system with a simple example.
 Although certain automotive control requires measurements from  312  Chapter 7  multiple sensors (i.
 Let the input to the controller at time tk be xk and the output corresponding to this and other previous inputs be denoted yk.
 It should be noted that for a purely linear system with continuous time sensor and actuator, it is possible to develop the control function relating input and output using continuous time techniques.
 The trend in contemporary automotive electronic systems is to perform multiple control operations using an integrated digital system based upon a microprocessor/microcontroller.
 The trend in contemporary automotive electronic systems is to perform multiple control operations using an integrated digital system based upon a microprocessor/microcontroller.
  Digital Engine Control Features Recall from Chapter 5 that one primary purpose of the electronic engine control system is to regulate the mixture (i.
 Ignition timing and EGR are controlled separately to optimize performance and fuel economy.
1 illustrates the primary components of an electronic engine control system.
 In this figure, the engine control system is a microcontroller, typically implemented with a specially designed microprocessor or microcontroller and operating under program control.
 In this figure, the engine control system is a microcontroller, typically implemented with a specially designed microprocessor or microcontroller and operating under program control.
 In this figure, the engine control system is a microcontroller, typically implemented with a specially designed microprocessor or microcontroller and operating under program control.
 In this figure, the engine control system is a microcontroller, typically implemented with a specially designed microprocessor or microcontroller and operating under program control.
 Typically, the controller incorporates hardware for the multiply/divide operation as well as ROM (see Chapter 4).
1: Components of an electronically controlled engine.
 The microcontroller under program control generates output electrical signals to operate the fuel injectors so as to maintain the desired mixture and ignition to optimize performance.
 The microcontroller under program control generates output electrical signals to operate the fuel injectors so as to maintain the desired mixture and ignition to optimize performance.
 With respect to the fuel control function the digital engine control system obtains a measurement of mass airflow typically using a mass airflow (MAF) sensor.
 With respect to the fuel control function the digital engine control system obtains a measurement of mass airflow typically using a mass airflow (MAF) sensor.
 As explained in Chapter 6, the function Fm for a representative production MAF sensor is given by vo ðM_ a Þ ¼  qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ v2o ð0Þ þ KMAF M_ a  However, a digital fuel control system can invert a nonlinear function to obtain the value M_ a of mass airflow: M_ a ¼ fm1 ðvo Þ  (5)  314  Chapter 7  As explained in Chapter 5, the intake to the engine includes EGR as well as air.
 As will be shown below, the digital engine control system is able to determine the EGR mass flow rate M_ EGR since it controls the flow of EGR.
 As will be shown below, the digital engine control system is able to determine the EGR mass flow rate M_ EGR since it controls the flow of EGR.
 An ideal engine control would determine the mass of air drawn into the mth cylinder during the nth engine cycle Ma(n, m).
 This ideal controller would instantaneously inject fuel with a uniform distribution at the end of the intake process for this cylinder to achieve a uniform stoichiometric mixture throughout the cylinder in preparation for compression ignition and power generation.
 However, this ideal fuel control is not practically achievable.
 On the other hand, suboptimal fuel control that is very close to optimal can be achieved in practice.
 As will be shown later in this chapter, closed-loop fuel control provides sufficient regulation of mixture to meet the strictest emission regulations.
 It will also be shown later in this chapter that fuel control operates in several possible modes.
 However, before proceeding to this discussion it is helpful to explain some of the basic issues in the development of the final system configuration and fuel control algorithms.
 As explained below, the correct Ra/f depends upon the control operating mode.
 It should be recalled that a fuel injector is a solenoid-operated valve that is opened by an electrical control signal at the proper time in the engine cycle for a period of time sf(n, m) (for cylinder m during cycle n) that is computed in the digital engine control system.
 It should be recalled that a fuel injector is a solenoid-operated valve that is opened by an electrical control signal at the proper time in the engine cycle for a period of time sf(n, m) (for cylinder m during cycle n) that is computed in the digital engine control system.
 The quantity of fuel delivered by the fuel injector F(n, m) for the mth cylinder during the nth engine cycle is given by tnm þs Z f ðn;mÞ  Fðn; mÞ ¼  M_ f dt  (9)  tnm  where tn,m is the beginning time of fuel delivery control binary signal, tn,m þ sF(n, m) is the end of fuel injection period, and M_ f is the fuel flow rate for fuel injector.
 The binary fuel injection control voltage is timed such that fuel is delivered during a portion of the intake stroke.
  Control Modes for Fuel Control The engine control system is responsible for controlling fuel and ignition for all possible engine-operating conditions.
  Control Modes for Fuel Control The engine control system is responsible for controlling fuel and ignition for all possible engine-operating conditions.
 However, there are a number of distinct categories of engine operation, each of which corresponds to a separate and distinct operating mode for the engine control system.
 The control system must determine the operating mode from the existing sensor data and call the particular corresponding software routine.
 We begin with a qualitative survey of system operation in the various control modes and later present formal models.
 For a typical engine, there are at least seven different engine-operating modes that affect fuel control: engine crank, engine warm-up, open-loop control, closed-loop control, hard acceleration, deceleration, and idle.
 For a typical engine, there are at least seven different engine-operating modes that affect fuel control: engine crank, engine warm-up, open-loop control, closed-loop control, hard acceleration, deceleration, and idle.
 For a typical engine, there are at least seven different engine-operating modes that affect fuel control: engine crank, engine warm-up, open-loop control, closed-loop control, hard acceleration, deceleration, and idle.
 The program for mode control logic determines the engine-operating mode from sensor data and timers.
 In the earliest versions of electronic fuel control systems, the fuel metering actuator typically consisted of one or two fuel injectors mounted near the throttle plate so as to deliver fuel into the throttle body.
 Some engine control systems involve vehicle speed sensors and various switches to identify brake on/off and the transmission gear, depending on the particular control strategy employed.
 Some engine control systems involve vehicle speed sensors and various switches to identify brake on/off and the transmission gear, depending on the particular control strategy employed.
 We consider next the individual engine control modes.
  Engine Start When the ignition key is switched on initially, the mode control logic automatically selects an engine start control scheme that provides the correct temperature-dependent air/fuel ratio required for starting the engine.
  Engine Start When the ignition key is switched on initially, the mode control logic automatically selects an engine start control scheme that provides the correct temperature-dependent air/fuel ratio required for starting the engine.
 Once the engine RPM rises above the cranking value, the controller identifies the “engine started” mode and passes control to the program for the engine warm-up mode.
 Once the engine RPM rises above the cranking value, the controller identifies the “engine started” mode and passes control to the program for the engine warm-up mode.
)  Open-Loop Mode When the coolant temperature rises sufficiently, the mode control logic directs the system to operate in the open-loop control mode until the EGO sensor warms up enough to provide accurate readings.
)  Open-Loop Mode When the coolant temperature rises sufficiently, the mode control logic directs the system to operate in the open-loop control mode until the EGO sensor warms up enough to provide accurate readings.
 When the sensor has indicated rich at least once and after the engine has been in open loop for a specific time, the control mode selection logic selects the closed-loop mode for the system.
 If the sensor cools, the control mode logic selects the open-loop mode again.
  Acceleration/Deceleration During hard acceleration or heavy engine load, the control mode selection logic chooses a scheme that provides a rich air/fuel mixture for the duration of the acceleration or heavy  318  Chapter 7  load.
 This scheme has the capability to provide maximum torque, but depending on driver demand, suboptimal emissions control, and relatively poor fuel economy regulation as compared with a stoichiometric air/fuel ratio may occur.
 After the need for enrichment has passed, control is returned to either open-loop or closed-loop mode, depending on the control mode logic conditions that exist at that time.
 After the need for enrichment has passed, control is returned to either open-loop or closed-loop mode, depending on the control mode logic conditions that exist at that time.
 When idle conditions are present, control mode logic passes system control to the idle speed control mode.
 When idle conditions are present, control mode logic passes system control to the idle speed control mode.
 When idle conditions are present, control mode logic passes system control to the idle speed control mode.
 In this mode, the engine speed is controlled to reduce engine roughness and stalling that might occur because the idle load has changed due to air conditioner compressor operation, alternator operation, or gearshift positioning from park/neutral to drive, although stoichiometric mixture is used if the engine is warm.
 A detailed model and performance analysis of idle speed control is presented later in this chapter.
 As explained above, in modern engine control systems, the controller is a special-purpose digital computer built around a microprocessor or microcontroller.
 As explained above, in modern engine control systems, the controller is a special-purpose digital computer built around a microprocessor or microcontroller.
 As explained above, in modern engine control systems, the controller is a special-purpose digital computer built around a microprocessor or microcontroller.
 An exemplary configuration of a typical modern digital engine control system is depicted in Figure 7.
2: Digital engine control system diagram.
  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  319  The controller also includes ROM containing the main program (of several thousand lines of code).
 This ROM is accessed by the engine control system via address bus A and receives data via data bus D (see Chapter 4).
 There is also a section of ROM continuing parameter values for specific control modes and tables of data for various control functions as explained later in this chapter.
 There is also a section of ROM continuing parameter values for specific control modes and tables of data for various control functions as explained later in this chapter.
 The sensor signals are connected to the controller via an input/output (I/O) subsystem.
 In addition, this microprocessor-based control system includes hardware for sampling and analog-todigital conversion such that all sensor measurements are in a format suitable for reading by the microprocessor.
2, the sensors that measure various engine variables for control are as follows: mass airflow sensor (MAF), engine temperature as represented by coolant temperature (CT), one or two heated exhaust gas oxygen sensor(s) (HEGO), crankshaft angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/RPM), throttle position sensor (TPS), and differential pressure sensor (exhaust to intake) for EGR control (DPS).
2, the sensors that measure various engine variables for control are as follows: mass airflow sensor (MAF), engine temperature as represented by coolant temperature (CT), one or two heated exhaust gas oxygen sensor(s) (HEGO), crankshaft angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/RPM), throttle position sensor (TPS), and differential pressure sensor (exhaust to intake) for EGR control (DPS).
 The control system selects an operating mode based on the instantaneous operating condition as determined from the sensor measurements.
 The controller then determines the quantity of fuel to be injected into each cylinder during each engine cycle.
 This quantity of fuel depends on the particular engine-operating condition as well as the controller mode of operation, as will presently be explained.
  Engine Crank While the engine is being cranked, the fuel control system must provide an intake air/fuel ratio of anywhere from 2:1 to 12:1, depending on engine temperature.
 Once the engine is started the controller switches to an engine warm-up mode.
 Therefore, the fuel control system stays in the open-loop mode, but the air/fuel ratio commands continue to be altered due to the temperature changes.
 The emphasis in this control mode is on rapid and smooth engine warm-up.
 Fuel economy and emission control may be still a secondary concern.
 The controller selects a warm-up time from a lookup table based on the temperature of the coolant.
 These data are sent to the controller via the system data bus (D/B).
 In this case, the digital engine control can calculate the desired dependent variable for any given measurement of the independent variable x.
 The set of coefficients for any given data are normally determined during the development of an engine control system.
 These coefficients are stored in ROM such that the determination of y for any measurement x (during normal engine operation) is readily implemented in the control system using Eqn (13) and the stored values for {am} for the polynomial model method and by Eqn (12) for the lookup table and interpolation method.
 The controller is configured to switch from engine warm-up mode to an open-loop (warmed-up engine) mode after a sufficient time by means of an internal timer.
  Open-Loop Control For a warmed-up engine, the controller will operate in an open loop if the closed-loop mode is not available for any reason.
” Until conditions permit closed-loop mode of fuel control the fuel quantity is determined from MAF measurements.
  Closed-Loop Control Perhaps the most important adjustment to the fuel injector pulse duration comes when the control is in the closed-loop mode.
 To avoid degraded emission control, it is important for the control system to switch to the closed-loop mode as soon as possible and to remain in this mode for as much of the engine operation as possible.
 To avoid degraded emission control, it is important for the control system to switch to the closed-loop mode as soon as possible and to remain in this mode for as much of the engine operation as possible.
 Chapter 1 presented a discussion of the theory of the closed-loop control of a dynamic system in which a measurement of the dynamic system output variable that is being regulated/ controlled is compared with the desired value.
 Chapter 1 presented a discussion of the theory of the closed-loop control of a dynamic system in which a measurement of the dynamic system output variable that is being regulated/ controlled is compared with the desired value.
 The controller produces an input to the plant that changes the output variable in such a way as to minimize the error between actual and desired output.
 Ideally, control of exhaust emissions would require a sensor for measuring the concentration of each regulated gas component in the engine exhaust as explained in Chapter 5.
 A large body of theory (both linear and nonlinear) exists which is applicable in the design of  324  Chapter 7  a control system provided a sensor exists that can yield an accurate measurement with sufficient bandwidth of the variable being regulated.
 On the other hand, as explained in Chapter 5, the use of a three-way catalytic converter enables tailpipe emissions to be controlled within regulatory limits provided the intake mixture remains sufficiently close to stoichiometry.
 Unfortunately, a measurement of a switching output variable is compatible only with a limit cycle controller.
 None of the linear control theory of Chapter 1 including design, performance analysis, and stability is applicable to a limit cycle control system.
 None of the linear control theory of Chapter 1 including design, performance analysis, and stability is applicable to a limit cycle control system.
 Although such theory exists for a limit cycle controller, this theory is beyond the scope of this book.
 However, as will be shown below, it is possible to develop a dynamic simulation model for a limit cycle fuel control system.
 The physical configuration for the closed-loop fuel control system is depicted in Figure 7.
 Closed-loop fuel control consists of determining sF(n) as a function of the EGO sensor output voltage.
  Eng  EGO  Ma (n) digital control system  (b)  I  To Workspace 3 1 — s Integrator  2 alpha  In1 Out1  + + Add  Transport Delay  EGO  y To Workspace  -K-  v  beta avg  To Workspace 2  t Clock  To Workspace 1  Figure 7.
4: Closed-loop fuel control system.
 The integral-like term is determined in the digital control system as a function of the EGO sensor voltage vo.
 Using the above notation, the integral control algorithm at computation time tk ; ½IðkÞ is given by Iðk þ 1Þ ¼ IðkÞ  1  l0 ðkÞ < 1  ¼ IðkÞ þ 1  l0 ðkÞ > 1  (21)  In this algorithm, the computation time tk is given by tk ¼ kTs k ¼ 1; 2.
 The linear combination above for CL(n) is representative of closed-loop correction calculations used by a digital fuel control system to modify the base pulse duration.
 A fundamental characteristic of a limit cycle control system is the oscillatory behavior of its control variable.
 A fundamental characteristic of a limit cycle control system is the oscillatory behavior of its control variable.
 In the case of the fuel control, the frequency of oscillation and the amplitude of the deviation vary inversely with Te.
 To illustrate the behavior of a limit cycle controller a MATLAB/SIMULINK simulation was constructed for the example block diagram of Figure 7.
 The closed-loop control parameters were taken to be a ¼ 2Ts, b ¼ 0.
23), combined with the integral control logic of Eqn (21).
  328  Chapter 7  Acceleration Enrichment During periods of heavy engine load such as during hard acceleration, fuel control is adjusted to provide an enriched air/fuel ratio to maximize engine torque and very briefly neglect fuel economy and emissions.
 The fuel system controller responds by increasing the pulse duration of the fuel injector signal for the duration of the heavy load.
 This enrichment enables the engine to operate with a torque greater than that allowed when emissions and fuel economy are controlled.
 In discrete time control systems, the rate of throttle change rT is given by rT ðkÞ ¼  qT ðkÞ  qT ðk  1Þ Ts  (23)  Enrichment is enabled whenever rT exceeds a predetermined threshold value (rTt).
 When these conditions are detected by the control computer, it computes a decrease in the pulse duration of the fuel injector signal.
  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  329  Idle Speed Control The idle speed control mode is used to prevent engine stall during idle.
 The control mode selection logic switches to idle speed control when the throttle angle reaches its zero (completely closed) position as detected by a switch on the throttle that is closed and engine RPM falls below a minimum value.
 The control mode selection logic switches to idle speed control when the throttle angle reaches its zero (completely closed) position as detected by a switch on the throttle that is closed and engine RPM falls below a minimum value.
 Idle speed is controlled by using an electronically controlled throttle bypass valve, as seen in Figure 7.
 Idle speed is controlled by using an electronically controlled throttle bypass valve, as seen in Figure 7.
 There are various schemes for operating a valve to introduce bypass air for idle control.
 One relatively common method for controlling the idle speed bypass air uses a special type of motor called a stepper motor.
 This is advantageous for idle speed control since the controller can very precisely position the idle bypass valve by sending the proper number of pulses of the correct phasing.
 This is advantageous for idle speed control since the controller can very precisely position the idle bypass valve by sending the proper number of pulses of the correct phasing.
 A digital engine control computer can precisely determine the position of the valve in a number of ways.
 The physical configuration for the idle speed control is depicted in Figure 7.
 In addition, the digital engine control system receives digital on/off status inputs from several power-consuming devices attached to the engine, such as the air conditioner clutch switch, park-neutral switch, and the battery charge indicator.
  Discrete Time Idle Speed Control In Chapter 5, an idle speed control system (ISC) was introduced based upon the continuous time control theory of Chapter 1.
  Discrete Time Idle Speed Control In Chapter 5, an idle speed control system (ISC) was introduced based upon the continuous time control theory of Chapter 1.
6: Idle speed control system.
  control modes of the digital engine control system.
  control modes of the digital engine control system.
7 is a block diagram of this discrete time system in which the control subsystem labeled Hc is implemented in the integrated digital electronic engine control system.
7 is a block diagram of this discrete time system in which the control subsystem labeled Hc is implemented in the integrated digital electronic engine control system.
7: Discrete time idle speed control block diagram.
  The present discussion is an example of discrete time control introduced in Chapter 2.
 In this figure, the plant being controlled consists of the engine with the idle air bypass actuator.
 Using the Laplace transform methods of Chapter 1, it was shown in Chapter 5, that, for the example ISC, the plant transfer function Hp(s) is given by 5000 Hp ðsÞ ¼ 3 s þ 35s2 þ 875s þ 6250  (25)  The desired idle angular speed (or set point for the controller) is denoted Us in Figure 7.
 For the purposes of comparing the continuous time idle speed control system with the present discrete time, digital implementation we make the same assumption here along with assuming the same plant model.
 In accordance with the discrete time control theory of Chapter 2 we assume an ideal sampler/ quantizer (i.
 A/D converter) such that the input to the discrete time control system is ˛: ˛k ¼ ˛ðkTÞ k ¼ 1; 2; 3.
  (27)  We further assume that in keeping with the continuous time system, the control is PI.
 The continuous time model for the control system is given by its operational transfer function: Hc ðsÞ ¼  uðsÞ ˛ðsÞ  KI Hc ðsÞ ¼ Kp þ s  (28)  332  Chapter 7  In the time domain, the control variable u(t) can be written as Zt uðtÞ ¼ Kp ˛ðtÞ þ KI  ˛ðt0 Þdt0  o  The discrete time model for u(t) at sample time tk(i.
 The continuous time model for the control system is given by its operational transfer function: Hc ðsÞ ¼  uðsÞ ˛ðsÞ  KI Hc ðsÞ ¼ Kp þ s  (28)  332  Chapter 7  In the time domain, the control variable u(t) can be written as Zt uðtÞ ¼ Kp ˛ðtÞ þ KI  ˛ðt0 Þdt0  o  The discrete time model for u(t) at sample time tk(i.
 Using this model, we obtain the following recursive equation: uk ¼ uk1 þ  KI T ð˛k þ ˛k1 Þ 2  (30)  Taking the z-transform of this equation yields the following expression: uI ðzÞ ¼ z1 uI ðzÞ þ  K1 Tð1  z1 Þ ˛ðzÞ 2  (31)  This equation can be rewritten as uI ðzÞ ¼  KI T ðz þ 1Þ ˛ðzÞ 2 ðz  1Þ  (32)  It can be shown that the z-transform operational transfer function Hc(z) is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ ˛ðzÞ  KI Tðz þ 1Þ ðKp þ KI T=2Þz þ ðKI T=2  Kp Þ ¼ Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ ðz  1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  (33)  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  333  The controller outputs a sequence {uk} control signal that is converted to a piecewise continuous time control signal uðtÞ via the ZOH (see Chapter 2) which operates the plant actuator.
 Using this model, we obtain the following recursive equation: uk ¼ uk1 þ  KI T ð˛k þ ˛k1 Þ 2  (30)  Taking the z-transform of this equation yields the following expression: uI ðzÞ ¼ z1 uI ðzÞ þ  K1 Tð1  z1 Þ ˛ðzÞ 2  (31)  This equation can be rewritten as uI ðzÞ ¼  KI T ðz þ 1Þ ˛ðzÞ 2 ðz  1Þ  (32)  It can be shown that the z-transform operational transfer function Hc(z) is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ ˛ðzÞ  KI Tðz þ 1Þ ðKp þ KI T=2Þz þ ðKI T=2  Kp Þ ¼ Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ ðz  1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  (33)  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  333  The controller outputs a sequence {uk} control signal that is converted to a piecewise continuous time control signal uðtÞ via the ZOH (see Chapter 2) which operates the plant actuator.
 Using this model, we obtain the following recursive equation: uk ¼ uk1 þ  KI T ð˛k þ ˛k1 Þ 2  (30)  Taking the z-transform of this equation yields the following expression: uI ðzÞ ¼ z1 uI ðzÞ þ  K1 Tð1  z1 Þ ˛ðzÞ 2  (31)  This equation can be rewritten as uI ðzÞ ¼  KI T ðz þ 1Þ ˛ðzÞ 2 ðz  1Þ  (32)  It can be shown that the z-transform operational transfer function Hc(z) is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ ˛ðzÞ  KI Tðz þ 1Þ ðKp þ KI T=2Þz þ ðKI T=2  Kp Þ ¼ Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ ðz  1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  (33)  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  333  The controller outputs a sequence {uk} control signal that is converted to a piecewise continuous time control signal uðtÞ via the ZOH (see Chapter 2) which operates the plant actuator.
8: Step response of discrete time idle speed control.
 When the engine is not idling, the idle speed control valve may be completely closed so that the throttle plate has total control of intake air.
 When the engine is not idling, the idle speed control valve may be completely closed so that the throttle plate has total control of intake air.
  EGR Control A second electronic engine control subsystem involves the control of exhaust gas that is recirculated back to the intake manifold.
  EGR Control A second electronic engine control subsystem involves the control of exhaust gas that is recirculated back to the intake manifold.
 The control mode selection logic determines when EGR is turned off or on.
 The controller operates a solenoid in a periodic variable-duty-cycle mode.
 By varying this duty cycle, the control system has proportional control over the EGR valve opening and thereby over the amount of EGR.
 By varying this duty cycle, the control system has proportional control over the EGR valve opening and thereby over the amount of EGR.
 In many EGR control systems the controller monitors the differential pressure between the exhaust and intake manifold via a differential pressure sensor (DPS).
 In many EGR control systems the controller monitors the differential pressure between the exhaust and intake manifold via a differential pressure sensor (DPS).
 With the signal from this sensor, the controller can calculate the valve opening for the desired EGR level.
 A simplified block diagram for an exemplary EGR control system is depicted in Figure 7.
 The engine controller determines the required amount of EGR based on the engine-operating condition and the signal from the differential pressure sensor (DPS) between intake and exhaust manifolds.
 The controller then commands the correct EGR valve position to achieve the desired amount of EGR via a variable-duty-cycle actuator signal.
 Ideally, closed-loop control of EGR would require, for example, a combustion temperature sensor.
9: EGR control block diagram.
 In principle, the amount of EGR could be based upon a closedloop control system using exhaust gas temperature measurements for a feedback signal.
 There it was explained that performance improvement and emission reductions could be achieved if the opening and closing times (and ideally the valve lift) of both intake and exhaust valves could be controlled as a function of operating conditions.
 The desired exhaust and/or intake camshaft phasing is stored in memory (ROM) in the engine control system as a function of RPM and load.
 Once the desired camshaft phasing has been determined, the engine control system sends an appropriate electrical control signal to an actuator (e.
 Once the desired camshaft phasing has been determined, the engine control system sends an appropriate electrical control signal to an actuator (e.
 For either this latter mechanism or one based upon a helical gear axial position, closed-loop control enables the engine control system to optimize volumetric efficiency.
 For either this latter mechanism or one based upon a helical gear axial position, closed-loop control enables the engine control system to optimize volumetric efficiency.
 Since a variable valve phasing system is in fact a position control system, closed-loop control of a camshaft phase requires a measurement of camshaft position relative to the crankshaft.
 Since a variable valve phasing system is in fact a position control system, closed-loop control of a camshaft phase requires a measurement of camshaft position relative to the crankshaft.
10a depicts a physical configuration of a representative camshaft phasing control system.
 Consequently, the VVP control must have the capability to follow relatively rapid changes in command.
 The control, of course, must be stable, and should be robust with respect to parameter changes.
 The dynamic response of the VVP control system should be robust with respect  oil under pressure A actuator (spool valve)  u  engine control  VVP mechanism  R  φc  camshaft angular position sensor  (a) S φd  (b)  +  Єk  Є _  T  Hc(z) control  uk  ZOH  – u  Hp(s) plant  Hs(s) sensor  Figure 7.
 The dynamic response of the VVP control system should be robust with respect  oil under pressure A actuator (spool valve)  u  engine control  VVP mechanism  R  φc  camshaft angular position sensor  (a) S φd  (b)  +  Єk  Є _  T  Hc(z) control  uk  ZOH  – u  Hp(s) plant  Hs(s) sensor  Figure 7.
 The dynamic response of the VVP control system should be robust with respect  oil under pressure A actuator (spool valve)  u  engine control  VVP mechanism  R  φc  camshaft angular position sensor  (a) S φd  (b)  +  Єk  Є _  T  Hc(z) control  uk  ZOH  – u  Hp(s) plant  Hs(s) sensor  Figure 7.
  φc  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  339  to oil viscosity, which changes with changes in engine temperature; that is, the closed-loop gain for the control system should have large gain and phase margins (see Chapter 1).
 The VVP control is one function of the digital control system.
 The VVP control is one function of the digital control system.
 As explained in Chapter 2, a discrete time control system that regulates a continuous time plant requires a sample and A/D converter as well as a zero order hold (ZOH), both of which are incorporated in the block diagram of Figure 7.
 Sensor measurements for such a system are assumed to be ideal such that the sensor transfer function is taken to be Hs ðsÞy1 In Chapter 6, it was shown that the plant transfer function for this VVP configuration is given by Hp ðsÞ ¼  Ka sðs þ so Þ  (41)  For the present example, the following parameters are chosen: Ka ¼ 2600 so ¼ 17 A PID control law is selected to provide sufficient flexibility to meet design objectives.
 The continuous time PID control law is given by d˛ þ KI u ¼ Kp ˛ þ KD dt  Z ˛dt  (42)  Using the root locus techniques of Chapter 1, the following gain parameters are given which satisfy the overshoot and response time criteria: Kp ¼ 0:080 KD =Kp ¼ 0:020 KI =Kp ¼ 0:100 One of the requirements for the VVP control system is robust stability; in Chapter 1, it was shown that robustness is expressed meaningfully by gain and phase margins as determined by the bode plot for the product Hc(s)Hp(s).
 The continuous time PID control law is given by d˛ þ KI u ¼ Kp ˛ þ KD dt  Z ˛dt  (42)  Using the root locus techniques of Chapter 1, the following gain parameters are given which satisfy the overshoot and response time criteria: Kp ¼ 0:080 KD =Kp ¼ 0:020 KI =Kp ¼ 0:100 One of the requirements for the VVP control system is robust stability; in Chapter 1, it was shown that robustness is expressed meaningfully by gain and phase margins as determined by the bode plot for the product Hc(s)Hp(s).
  The discrete time model for the control system is given by uk ¼ Kp ˛k þ  where ˛k ¼ ˛ðtk Þ, tk ¼ kT  KD ð˛k  ˛k1 Þ þ KI ukI T  (43)  k ¼ 1; 2.
  In the section on idle speed control, it was shown that the z-transform of ukI using trapezoidal integration rule is given by R ukI ðzÞ ¼ KI Z ½ ˛dt ¼  KI Tðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  341  Combining all three terms in the control variable uk of Eqn (37), the control system transfer function Hc(z) is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ ˛ðzÞ  KD ðz  1Þ KI T ðz þ 1Þ þ Tz 2 ðz  1Þ      KD KI T 2 2KD KI T KD Kp þ þ  z  Kp þ zþ T T T 2 2 ¼ zðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  (44)  The plant and ZOH z-transform operational transfer function G(z) is found using the method given in Chapter 2: 1  GðzÞ ¼ ð1  z ÞZ    Hp ðsÞ s    The z-transform in the above equation can be found by expanding Hp(s)/s in a partial fraction.
  In the section on idle speed control, it was shown that the z-transform of ukI using trapezoidal integration rule is given by R ukI ðzÞ ¼ KI Z ½ ˛dt ¼  KI Tðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  341  Combining all three terms in the control variable uk of Eqn (37), the control system transfer function Hc(z) is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ ˛ðzÞ  KD ðz  1Þ KI T ðz þ 1Þ þ Tz 2 ðz  1Þ      KD KI T 2 2KD KI T KD Kp þ þ  z  Kp þ zþ T T T 2 2 ¼ zðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  (44)  The plant and ZOH z-transform operational transfer function G(z) is found using the method given in Chapter 2: 1  GðzÞ ¼ ð1  z ÞZ    Hp ðsÞ s    The z-transform in the above equation can be found by expanding Hp(s)/s in a partial fraction.
  In the section on idle speed control, it was shown that the z-transform of ukI using trapezoidal integration rule is given by R ukI ðzÞ ¼ KI Z ½ ˛dt ¼  KI Tðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  341  Combining all three terms in the control variable uk of Eqn (37), the control system transfer function Hc(z) is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  uðzÞ ˛ðzÞ  KD ðz  1Þ KI T ðz þ 1Þ þ Tz 2 ðz  1Þ      KD KI T 2 2KD KI T KD Kp þ þ  z  Kp þ zþ T T T 2 2 ¼ zðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  (44)  The plant and ZOH z-transform operational transfer function G(z) is found using the method given in Chapter 2: 1  GðzÞ ¼ ð1  z ÞZ    Hp ðsÞ s    The z-transform in the above equation can be found by expanding Hp(s)/s in a partial fraction.
 Thus, this digital variable camshaft phase control system meets the original objectives.
 The distributor and single coil have been replaced by multiple coils and an electronic control system.
 In such a system, the controller selects the appropriate coil and delivers a trigger pulse to the ignition control circuitry at the correct time for each cylinder.
 In such a system, the controller selects the appropriate coil and delivers a trigger pulse to the ignition control circuitry at the correct time for each cylinder.
13, the spark advance value is computed in the main engine control (i.
, the same controller that regulates fuel).
 This system receives data from the various sensors (as described above with respect to fuel control) and determines the correct spark advance for the instantaneous operating condition.
 The engine control system obtains readings from the various sensors and generates an address to the lookup table (ROM).
 After reading the data from the lookup tables, the control system computes the correct spark advance (possibly including interpolation).
 In a typical electronic ignition control system, the total spark advance, SA (in degrees before TDC), is made up of several components that are added together: SA ¼ SAS þ SAP þ SAT  (52)  The first component, SAS, is the basic spark advance, which is a tabulated function of RPM and MAP or MAF.
 The control system reads RPM and MAP, or MAF and calculates the address in ROM of the SAS that corresponds to these values.
 The SAs tabulated values that are placed in ROM are normally determined via engine mapping during development of an engine control system.
 The major disadvantage of open-loop control is that it cannot automatically compensate for mechanical changes in the system.
 Closed-loop control of ignition timing is desirable from the standpoint of improving engine performance and maintaining that performance in spite of system changes.
 One control strategy for spark advance under closed-loop control is to advance the spark timing until the knock level becomes unacceptable.
 One control strategy for spark advance under closed-loop control is to advance the spark timing until the knock level becomes unacceptable.
 At this point, the control system reduces the spark advance (retarded spark) until acceptable levels of knock are achieved.
 Of course, a spark advance control scheme based on limiting the levels of knocking requires a knock sensor such as that explained in Chapter 6.
 Integration can be accomplished numerically in the engine control or as a part of the knock sensor instrumentation using an operational amplifier circuit configured to perform analog integration.
 The spark control system compares this voltage with a threshold voltage to determine whether knock has or has not occurred.
 This envelope-detected voltage is sent to the controller, where it is compared with a level corresponding to the knock intensity threshold.
 The comparator function is normally implemented in the digital control system by numerically comparing the integrated knock intensity signal with a threshold TK (under program control; see Figure 7.
 The comparator function is normally implemented in the digital control system by numerically comparing the integrated knock intensity signal with a threshold TK (under program control; see Figure 7.
 In such an implementation, the controller generates a binary-valued variable (denoted K in Figure 7.
  Spark Advance Correction Scheme Although the details of spark advance control vary from manufacturer to manufacturer, there are generally two classes of correction that are used: fast correction and slow correction.
 The slow correction scheme is more of an adaptive closed-loop control than is the fast correction scheme.
  Integrated Engine Control System Each control subsystem for fuel control, spark control, and EGR has been discussed separately.
  Integrated Engine Control System Each control subsystem for fuel control, spark control, and EGR has been discussed separately.
  Integrated Engine Control System Each control subsystem for fuel control, spark control, and EGR has been discussed separately.
 However, in a contemporary vehicle an integrated electronic engine control system employs an open architecture and can include these subsystems and provide additional functions.
 (Usually, the flexibility of the digital control system allows such expansion quite easily because the computer program can be changed to accomplish the expanded functions.
 This creates extra heat to speed warm-up of the converter and EGO sensor, enabling the fuel controller to go to the closed-loop mode relatively quickly.
 The computer program for the control mode selection logic can be modified to include the conditions for controlling secondary air.
 The computer program for the control mode selection logic can be modified to include the conditions for controlling secondary air.
 In one configuration, the engine controller regulates the secondary air by using two solenoid valves similar to the EGR valve.
 The control system diagram for secondary air is shown in Figure 7.
  Evaporative Emissions Canister Purge In pre-emission controlled vehicles, the fuel stored in the fuel system tended to evaporate and release hydrocarbons (HCs) into the atmosphere.
 The collected fuel is released into the intake through a solenoid valve controlled by the computer.
  EXHAUST MANIFOLD  356  Chapter 7  Automatic System Adjustment Another important feature of microcomputer engine control systems is their ability to be programmed to adapt to parameter changes.
 Many control systems use this feature to enable the computer to modify lookup table values for computing open-loop air/fuel ratios.
 If the difference is large, the system controller corrects the lookup tables so that the open-loop values more closely match the closed-loop values.
 The next time the engine is started, the new lookup table values will be used in the open-loop mode and will provide more accurate control of the air/fuel ratio than the unmodified values.
 This feature is very important because it allows the system controller to adjust to long-term changes in engine and fuel system conditions.
 This feature can be applied in individual subsystem control systems or in the fully integrated control system.
 This feature can be applied in individual subsystem control systems or in the fully integrated control system.
 If not available initially, it may be added to the system by modifying its control program.
  System Diagnosis Another important feature of microcomputer engine control systems is their ability to diagnose failures in their control systems or components and alert the operator.
  System Diagnosis Another important feature of microcomputer engine control systems is their ability to diagnose failures in their control systems or components and alert the operator.
 If the open-loop calculations consistently come up different from those indicated in closed-loop mode, the engine control computer may determine that one of the many sensors used in the open-loop calculations has experienced a calibration change or has failed completely.
 If the computer detects the loss of a primary control sensor or actuator, it may switch to in a different mode until the problem is repaired.
 Because of the flexibility of the microcomputer engine control system, additional diagnostic programs might be added to accommodate different engine models that contain more or fewer sensors.
 Keeping the system totally integrated gives the microcomputer controller access to more sensor inputs so they can be checked.
”  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  357  Summary of Control Modes A summary of the control modes for a digital engine control system is presented below.
”  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  357  Summary of Control Modes A summary of the control modes for a digital engine control system is presented below.
  Engine Crank (Start) The following list is a summary of the engine operations in the engine crank (starting) mode, wherein the primary control concern is rapid and reliable engine start: 1.
  engine RPM at cranking speed, engine coolant at relatively low temperature (cold start), air/fuel ratio low (cold start), spark retarded, EGR off, secondary air to exhaust manifold, fuel economy not closely controlled, and emissions not as closely controlled as during fully warmed engine.
  engine RPM at cranking speed, engine coolant at relatively low temperature (cold start), air/fuel ratio low (cold start), spark retarded, EGR off, secondary air to exhaust manifold, fuel economy not closely controlled, and emissions not as closely controlled as during fully warmed engine.
 Here, the primary control concern is rapid and smooth engine warm-up.
  engine RPM above cranking speed at command of driver, engine coolant temperature rises to minimum threshold, air/fuel ratio, spark timing set by controller, EGR off, heat supplied to HEGO, secondary air to exhaust manifold, fuel economy not as closely controlled as fully warmed engine, and emissions not as closely controlled as fully warmed engine.
  engine RPM above cranking speed at command of driver, engine coolant temperature rises to minimum threshold, air/fuel ratio, spark timing set by controller, EGR off, heat supplied to HEGO, secondary air to exhaust manifold, fuel economy not as closely controlled as fully warmed engine, and emissions not as closely controlled as fully warmed engine.
  engine RPM above cranking speed at command of driver, engine coolant temperature rises to minimum threshold, air/fuel ratio, spark timing set by controller, EGR off, heat supplied to HEGO, secondary air to exhaust manifold, fuel economy not as closely controlled as fully warmed engine, and emissions not as closely controlled as fully warmed engine.
  Open-Loop Control The following list summarizes the engine operations when the engine is being controlled in an open-loop mode.
 Fuel economy and emissions are closely controlled.
 engine RPM at command of driver (or idle speed control), 2.
  air/fuel ratio controlled by an open-loop system to 14.
7, EGO sensor temperature less than minimum threshold, heat supplied to HEGO, spark timing set by controller, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy controlled, emissions controlled.
7, EGO sensor temperature less than minimum threshold, heat supplied to HEGO, spark timing set by controller, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy controlled, emissions controlled.
7, EGO sensor temperature less than minimum threshold, heat supplied to HEGO, spark timing set by controller, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy controlled, emissions controlled.
7, EGO sensor temperature less than minimum threshold, heat supplied to HEGO, spark timing set by controller, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy controlled, emissions controlled.
  Closed-Loop Control For the closest control of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, the electronic engine control system is in a closed loop.
  Closed-Loop Control For the closest control of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, the electronic engine control system is in a closed loop.
 Fuel economy and emissions are controlled very tightly.
  engine RPM at command of driver (or idle speed control), engine temperature in normal range (above warm-up threshold), average air/fuel ratio controlled to 14.
  engine RPM at command of driver (or idle speed control), engine temperature in normal range (above warm-up threshold), average air/fuel ratio controlled to 14.
05, EGO sensor’s temperature above minimum threshold detected by a sensor output voltage indicating a rich mixture of air and fuel for a minimum amount of time, system returns to open loop if EGO sensor cools below minimum threshold or fails to indicate rich mixture for given length of time, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy tightly controlled, and emissions tightly controlled.
05, EGO sensor’s temperature above minimum threshold detected by a sensor output voltage indicating a rich mixture of air and fuel for a minimum amount of time, system returns to open loop if EGO sensor cools below minimum threshold or fails to indicate rich mixture for given length of time, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy tightly controlled, and emissions tightly controlled.
05, EGO sensor’s temperature above minimum threshold detected by a sensor output voltage indicating a rich mixture of air and fuel for a minimum amount of time, system returns to open loop if EGO sensor cools below minimum threshold or fails to indicate rich mixture for given length of time, EGR controlled, secondary air to catalytic converter, fuel economy tightly controlled, and emissions tightly controlled.
 Now, the engine controller is primarily concerned with providing maximum performance.
 relatively poor emissions control (relative to normal closed loop).
 The engine controller is primarily concerned with reducing excess emissions during deceleration, and keeping idle fuel consumption at a minimum.
 The majority of these transmissions are controlled electronically.
 An automatic transmission selects the gear ratio by means of an automatic control system.
 Using this approximation, it is shown in the reference that the torque ratio TR is given by  TR ¼  Tt ðA þ Da1 Þup þ ðDb  CÞut ¼ Tp ðA þ Ba1 Þup þ Bbut  (58)  where E G a1 ¼ pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ þ IðE þ FG2 =H 2 Þ 2I b¼  FG H pﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ  2 2 2I H IðE þ FG =H Þ  This simplified model is shown in the reference to correlate well with experimental data and is normally sufficient for development of transmission controls.
 In an electronically controlled automatic transmission, the clutches are electrically or electrohydraulically actuated via solenoid type actuators such as are described in Chapter 6.
 In the past, automatic transmissions have been controlled by a hydraulic and pneumatic system, but it is common in contemporary vehicles to use electronic controls as part of an integrated powertrain control system.
 In the past, automatic transmissions have been controlled by a hydraulic and pneumatic system, but it is common in contemporary vehicles to use electronic controls as part of an integrated powertrain control system.
 In the past, automatic transmissions have been controlled by a hydraulic and pneumatic system, but it is common in contemporary vehicles to use electronic controls as part of an integrated powertrain control system.
 The control system must determine the correct gear ratio by sensing the driver-selected command, accelerator pedal position, engine load, and vehicle motion.
 Once again, as in the case of electronic engine control, the electronic transmission control can optimize transmission control.
 Once again, as in the case of electronic engine control, the electronic transmission control can optimize transmission control.
 Once again, as in the case of electronic engine control, the electronic transmission control can optimize transmission control.
 However, since the engine and transmission function together as a power-producing unit, it is sensible to control both components in a single electronic controller.
 However, since the engine and transmission function together as a power-producing unit, it is sensible to control both components in a single electronic controller.
 The proper gear ratio is actually computed in the electronic transmission control portion of the powertrain control system.
 The proper gear ratio is actually computed in the electronic transmission control portion of the powertrain control system.
 The appropriate gear is selected by the control system, which operates the correct set of clutches via an electrohydraulic actuator (e.
25b, the gear ratio is given by gT ¼ gD gn  (61)  Although there are many possible powertrain control modes depending upon vehicle operating conditions and driver command, an illustrative example mode is maximizing the power delivered to the load (drive wheels) for a given engine brake power (Pb ¼ Tbue).
 For example, under certain powertrain operating conditions, the gear ratio, which maximizes this transfer of engine power to load power (PL ¼ TLuL) g,* is given approximately by sﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ Tb =ue g ¼ T L uL The controller selects the nearest available gear ratio from the set of possible choices.
 Another control mode for the transmission is to maximize drive axle torque TL, thereby maximizing vehicle acceleration whenever the driver command yields wide open throttle (WOT).
 The solenoids are actuators that receive an electrical signal from the powertrain control system as explained in Chapter 6.
 During normal driving, the electronic transmission controller determines the desired gear ratio from measurements of engine load and RPM as well as transmission output shaft RPM.
 Once this desired gear ratio is determined, the set of clutches to be activated is uniquely determined, and control signals are sent to the appropriate clutches.
 In this case, the controller shifts to a higher gear ratio, resulting in higher acceleration than would be possible in the previous gear setting.
 The torque converter locking clutch (TCC) is activated by a lock-up solenoid controlled by the engine control system computer.
 The torque converter locking clutch (TCC) is activated by a lock-up solenoid controlled by the engine control system computer.
 Certain cars are equipped with so-called traction control devices that can overcome this disadvantage of the differential.
  368  Chapter 7  A traction control system incorporates sensors for measuring wheel speed and a controller that determines the wheel slip condition based on these relative speeds.
  368  Chapter 7  A traction control system incorporates sensors for measuring wheel speed and a controller that determines the wheel slip condition based on these relative speeds.
 Wherever a wheel spin condition is detected, the controller sends electrical signals to the solenoids, thereby activating the clutches to eliminate the wheel slip.
 However, optimization of emission performance and/or fuel economy is a complex control problem.
 There are numerous issues and considerations involved in hybrid vehicle powertrain control, including the efficiencies of the IC engine and electric motor as a function of operating condition; the size of the vehicle and the power capacity of the IC engine and electric motor; the storage capacity and state of charge of the battery pack; accessory load characteristics of the vehicle; and, finally, the driving characteristics of the driver.
 With respect to this latter issue, it would be possible to optimize vehicle emissions and performance if the exact route, including vehicle speed, acceleration, deceleration, road inclination, and wind characteristics, could be programmed into the control memory before any trip were to begin.
  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  369  Depending on operating conditions, the controller in a full hybrid can command pure electric vehicle operation, pure IC engine operation, or a combination.
 Whenever the IC engine is operating, the controller should attempt to keep it at its peak efficiency.
28 is a separate controller for the motor.
 Also not shown in this figure but discussed later in this section is the powertrain controller that optimizes performance and emissions for the overall vehicle and engages/ disengages clutches as required.
 This conversion is accomplished in a motor control system that creates an electric control signal at frequency us in addition to power switching circuits (normally implemented via high-power switching transistors).
 This conversion is accomplished in a motor control system that creates an electric control signal at frequency us in addition to power switching circuits (normally implemented via high-power switching transistors).
 Motor control requires correct phasing relative to the orientation of the rotor.
 The induction motor controller can regulate Te(um) via the excitation frequency (us) and current amplitude Is or motor voltage Vs.
 One hypothetical control strategy would vary the excitation and synchronous excitation frequency (us) to optimize the motor efficiency.
 Normally, motor control is preferably done via regulation of Vs directly rather than via Is.
 Solving the above equation for Is and substituting it into the equation for motor torque yields ðM 2 =us Ls Lr Þ ðLv =Ls Þ ðRr =sÞ Vs2 Te ¼    2 M2 us 1  Lr þðRr =sÞ2 Lr Ls  (69)  The above equation provides a basis for motor torque control in hybrid vehicle applications.
 In this region, the motor torque is given approximately by  2 M s 2 Te y V us L2s Rr s On the other hand, when slip is relatively large the torque can be shown to be given approximately by  (70)  376  Chapter 7 M 2 Rr V2s Te y   M2 2 3 s ðLr Ls Þ us 1  Lr Ls  (71)  The above approximate expressions can be used to control motor torque for the two distinct regions of operation.
 In any event, the motor control can regulate torque by controlling excitation voltage as well as frequency us as explained later in this chapter.
 In any event, the motor control can regulate torque by controlling excitation voltage as well as frequency us as explained later in this chapter.
 The control electronics supplies a pulsating signal to the base B of transistor Q1, alternately switching it on and off.
 The secondary voltage is fed back to the control electronics, which varies the relative ON and OFF times to maintain V2 at the desired level.
 The control electronics internally computes the signals that control the phases (i.
 The control electronics internally computes the signals that control the phases (i.
 This control is normally implemented in the powertrain control system.
 This control is normally implemented in the powertrain control system.
 Powertrain control for a hybrid vehicle is achieved using a multimode digital control system.
 Powertrain control for a hybrid vehicle is achieved using a multimode digital control system.
 It is somewhat more complicated than the digital engine control system discussed earlier in this chapter in that it must control an IC engine as well as an EM motor.
 It is somewhat more complicated than the digital engine control system discussed earlier in this chapter in that it must control an IC engine as well as an EM motor.
 The inputs to this controller come from sensors that measure the following: • • • • • • •  power demand from driver (accelerator pedal), state of charge of battery pack, vehicle speed, ICE RPM and load, EM voltage and current, EM angular position (for brushless DC motors), and regulation of electric power flow and voltage.
  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  379  The system outputs include control signals to • • • •  ICE throttle position, EM motor control inputs (e.
  Digital Powertrain Control Systems  379  The system outputs include control signals to • • • •  ICE throttle position, EM motor control inputs (e.
 Rather, the throttle position (as measured by a sensor) is set by the control system via an electrical signal sent to an actuator (motor) that moves the throttle in a system called drive-by-wire.
 The control system itself is a digital controller using the inputs and outputs listed above and has the capability of controlling the hybrid powertrain in many different modes.
 The control system itself is a digital controller using the inputs and outputs listed above and has the capability of controlling the hybrid powertrain in many different modes.
 The control system itself is a digital controller using the inputs and outputs listed above and has the capability of controlling the hybrid powertrain in many different modes.
 If charge is low, then the controller can engage the clutch to the ICE such that the EM can begin acceleration and at the same time crank the ICE to start it.
 Should the vehicle go to a steady cruise at low battery SOC for engine operation near its optimum, then the control strategy normally is to switch off the electric power to the EM and power the vehicle solely and recharge the battery pack with the ICE.
 In other cruise conditions, the controller can balance power between ICE and EM in a way that maximizes total fuel economy (subject to emission constraints).
 For urban driving with frequent stops, the control strategy favors EM operation as long as SOC is sufficient.
 The various operating modes and control strategies for an HEV depend on many factors, including vehicle weight; relative size and power capacity of ICE/EM; and exhaust emissions and fuel economy of the ICE (as installed in the particular vehicle).
 However, the above discussion has provided background within which specific HEV configurations’ operating modes and control strategies can be understood.
 This vehicle incorporates many of the components of an HEV including an electric motor, a battery pack for storing electric energy, and an electronic controller that provides the motor excitation.
 Control of the EM in an EV is accomplished in a way that is similar to that described above for EM motor control in an HEV.
 This control is done by regulating the excitation voltage or current as well as the excitation frequency (which must satisfy the frequency condition for any motor).
 Electronic controls have been recently developed with the capability of regulating the motion along and about all three axes.
 Individual car models employ various selected combinations of these controls.
 This chapter discusses motion control electronics beginning with control of motion along the longitudinal axis in the form of a cruise control system.
 This chapter discusses motion control electronics beginning with control of motion along the longitudinal axis in the form of a cruise control system.
 This chapter discusses motion control electronics beginning with control of motion along the longitudinal axis in the form of a cruise control system.
 The forces and moments/torque that influence vehicle motion along the longitudinal axis include those due to the powertrain (including, in selected models, traction control), the brakes, the aerodynamic drag, and tire-rolling resistance, as well as the influence of gravity when the car is moving on a road with a nonzero inclination (or grade).
 In a traditional cruise control system, the tractive force due to the powertrain is balanced against all resisting forces to maintain a constant speed.
 In an advanced cruise control system, brakes are also automatically applied as required to maintain speed when going down a hill of sufficiently steep grade.
  Representative Cruise Control System Automotive cruise control is an excellent example of the type of electronic feedback control system that was discussed in general terms in Chapter 1.
  Representative Cruise Control System Automotive cruise control is an excellent example of the type of electronic feedback control system that was discussed in general terms in Chapter 1.
 Recall that the components of a control system include the plant, or system being controlled, and a sensor for measuring the plant variable being regulated.
 Recall that the components of a control system include the plant, or system being controlled, and a sensor for measuring the plant variable being regulated.
 It also includes an electronic control system that receives inputs in the form of the desired value of the regulated variable and the measured value of that variable from the sensor.
 The control system generates an error signal constituting the difference between the desired and actual values of this variable.
 The actuator controls the input to the plant in such a way that the regulated plant variable is moved toward the desired value.
 We begin with a simplified cruise control for a vehicle traveling along a straight road (along the x axis in our ECEF coordinate system).
 In the case of a cruise control, the variable being regulated is the vehicle speed: V¼  dx dt  where x is the translation of the vehicle in the ECEF frame.
 Upon reaching the desired speed (Vd), the driver activates a momentary contact switch that sets that  Vehicle-Motion Controls 383 speed as the command input to the control system.
 From that point on, the cruise control system maintains the desired speed automatically by operating the throttle via a throttle actuator.
 The plant being controlled consists of the powertrain (i.
 For an understanding of the dynamic performance of a cruise control, it is helpful to develop a model for vehicle motion along a road.
 The basic performance of a cruise control can be presented with a few simplifying assumptions.
 In the interest of safety a typical cruise control cannot be activated below a certain speed (e.
 The cruise control system employs an actuator that moves the throttle in response to the control signal.
 The cruise control system employs an actuator that moves the throttle in response to the control signal.
 Of course whenever the cruise control is disabled, this actuator must release control of the throttle such that the driver controls throttle angular position via the accelerator pedal and associated linkage.
 Of course whenever the cruise control is disabled, this actuator must release control of the throttle such that the driver controls throttle angular position via the accelerator pedal and associated linkage.
 Of course whenever the cruise control is disabled, this actuator must release control of the throttle such that the driver controls throttle angular position via the accelerator pedal and associated linkage.
 Except for roads with relatively steep grades, normally, once cruise control is activated relatively small, changes in throttle position are required to  384  Chapter 8  maintain selected vehicle speed.
 For our simplified model we assume that Tb varies linearly with cruise control output electrical signal u: Tb ¼ Ka u  (2)  where Ka is a constant for the engine/throttle actuator.
 This assumption, though not strictly valid, permits a system performance analysis using the discussion of linear control theory of Chapter 1 without any serious loss of generality.
 If the vehicle is traveling at a steady speed along a hill with slope angle q, then the Tb is determined from the following equation: gA  CD Sref VC2 Tb ¼r þ mr WV þ Mg sin q rW 2  (5)  For the operation of the cruise control system, it is normally sufficient to model vehicle dynamics with a linearized version of the nonlinear differential equation.
 In modeling the cruise control system, it is helpful to consider the influence of road grade (q) as a disturbance.
, q ¼ 0) is given by dVðsÞ Hp ðsÞ ¼ uðsÞ ¼  Ka gA =ðMrw Þ CD Sref Vc sþr M  (8)  The configuration for a representative automotive cruise control is shown in Figure 8.
 When the vehicle reaches the desired speed under normal driver accelerator pedal regulation of the throttle, to activate cruise control at that speed the driver pushes a momentary contact switch thereby setting the command speed in the controller.
 When the vehicle reaches the desired speed under normal driver accelerator pedal regulation of the throttle, to activate cruise control at that speed the driver pushes a momentary contact switch thereby setting the command speed in the controller.
 At this point, control of the throttle position is via the cruise control actuator.
 At this point, control of the throttle position is via the cruise control actuator.
 Also shown in this figure is a disable switch that completely disengages the cruise control system from the power supply such that throttle control reverts back to the accelerator pedal.
 Also shown in this figure is a disable switch that completely disengages the cruise control system from the power supply such that throttle control reverts back to the accelerator pedal.
 In an actual cruise control system, the disable function can be activated in a variety of ways, including the master power switch for the cruise control system and a brake pedal-activated switch that disables the cruise control any time that the brake pedal is moved from its rest position.
 In an actual cruise control system, the disable function can be activated in a variety of ways, including the master power switch for the cruise control system and a brake pedal-activated switch that disables the cruise control any time that the brake pedal is moved from its rest position.
 In an actual cruise control system, the disable function can be activated in a variety of ways, including the master power switch for the cruise control system and a brake pedal-activated switch that disables the cruise control any time that the brake pedal is moved from its rest position.
1: Cruise control configuration.
2: Cruise control block diagram.
  A block diagram of a cruise control system is shown in Figure 8.
 In the cruise control depicted in this figure, a proportional integral (PI) control strategy has been assumed.
 In the cruise control depicted in this figure, a proportional integral (PI) control strategy has been assumed.
 Before the advent of digital cruise control, there were a variety of analog systems which had a proportional-only (P) control law.
 Before the advent of digital cruise control, there were a variety of analog systems which had a proportional-only (P) control law.
 Nevertheless, the PI controller is representative of good design for such a control system since it can reduce steady-state speed errors to zero (as explained in Chapter 1).
 Nevertheless, the PI controller is representative of good design for such a control system since it can reduce steady-state speed errors to zero (as explained in Chapter 1).
 The controller then electronically generates the actuator signal by combining a term proportional to the error (Kpe) and a term proportional to the integral of the error: Z (10) K1 edt The actuator signal u is given by  Z u ¼ Kp e þ K I  edt  (11)  Operation of the system can be understood by considering the operation of a PI controller.
 The controller then electronically generates the actuator signal by combining a term proportional to the error (Kpe) and a term proportional to the integral of the error: Z (10) K1 edt The actuator signal u is given by  Z u ¼ Kp e þ K I  edt  (11)  Operation of the system can be understood by considering the operation of a PI controller.
  388  Chapter 8  The control signal at the output of the PI controller u is given by Z u ¼ Kp e þ KI edt  (12)  It is consistent with the linearized approximation to model the change in brake torque dTb due to actuator change in throttle position in response to the control signal u as linear in the control signal (as presented earlier): dTb ¼ Ka u where Ka is a constant for the throttle actuatoreengine combination.
  388  Chapter 8  The control signal at the output of the PI controller u is given by Z u ¼ Kp e þ KI edt  (12)  It is consistent with the linearized approximation to model the change in brake torque dTb due to actuator change in throttle position in response to the control signal u as linear in the control signal (as presented earlier): dTb ¼ Ka u where Ka is a constant for the throttle actuatoreengine combination.
  388  Chapter 8  The control signal at the output of the PI controller u is given by Z u ¼ Kp e þ KI edt  (12)  It is consistent with the linearized approximation to model the change in brake torque dTb due to actuator change in throttle position in response to the control signal u as linear in the control signal (as presented earlier): dTb ¼ Ka u where Ka is a constant for the throttle actuatoreengine combination.
  388  Chapter 8  The control signal at the output of the PI controller u is given by Z u ¼ Kp e þ KI edt  (12)  It is consistent with the linearized approximation to model the change in brake torque dTb due to actuator change in throttle position in response to the control signal u as linear in the control signal (as presented earlier): dTb ¼ Ka u where Ka is a constant for the throttle actuatoreengine combination.
 With the above models and notation, the vehicle dynamic equation of motion becomes gA Ka u rw   Z Ka Kp e þ KI edt ¼ gA rW  MdV_ þ KD dV þ Mgq ¼  (13)  Taking the Laplace transform of the above equation and solving for the speed differential yield sgqðsÞ    dVðsÞ ¼  KD gA Ka Kp gA Ka KI 2 s þ sþ þ M Mrw Mrw  (14)  A computer simulation of this simplified cruise control was done for a step change in grade of q ¼ 0.
 sea level on a standard day) KA ¼ 10 Kp ¼ 10 KI ¼ 50 rw ¼ 1 ft The simulation was done for the PI control but for reference purposes was also run for KI ¼ 0 (i.
 a proportional-only control).
3 shows the response for the car initially traveling under cruise control at 60 MPH.
 The dashed curve is the response of proportional-only control.
 Note that the speed drops down to a steady 53 MPH for the controller.
 The solid curve depicts the vehicle speed for the preferred PI control.
 Except for a brief overshoot, this control  Vehicle-Motion Controls 389  Figure 8.
3: Cruise control speed performance.
 It should be noted that the P-only control performance can be improved by increasing Kp (provided the system satisfies stability robustness criteria (see Chapter 1)).
 The response characteristics of a PI controller depend strongly on the choice of the gain parameters Kp and KI.
3 is that they demonstrate how the performance of a cruise control system is affected by the controller gains.
3 is that they demonstrate how the performance of a cruise control system is affected by the controller gains.
 These gains are simply parameters that are contained in the control system.
 They determine the relationship between the error, the integral of the error, and the actuator control signal.
 Usually a control system designer attempts to balance the proportional and integral control gains so that the system is optimally damped.
 Usually a control system designer attempts to balance the proportional and integral control gains so that the system is optimally damped.
 The control system should cause Tb to respond quickly and accurately to the command speed, but should not overtax the engine in the  390  Chapter 8 G(z) Vd  ek  e  + –  Ts  digital control Hc (z)  uk  ZOH Hh0  ū(t)  plant Hp (s)  V  sensor Hs (s)  Figure 8.
 The control system should cause Tb to respond quickly and accurately to the command speed, but should not overtax the engine in the  390  Chapter 8 G(z) Vd  ek  e  + –  Ts  digital control Hc (z)  uk  ZOH Hh0  ū(t)  plant Hp (s)  V  sensor Hs (s)  Figure 8.
4: Digital speed control block diagram.
 Therefore, the system designer chooses the control electronics that provide the following system qualities: 1.
  Quick response Stable system Small steady-state error Optimization of the control effort required  Digital Cruise Control The explanation of the operation of cruise control thus far has been based on a continuous time formulation of the problem.
  Quick response Stable system Small steady-state error Optimization of the control effort required  Digital Cruise Control The explanation of the operation of cruise control thus far has been based on a continuous time formulation of the problem.
 This formulation correctly describes the concept for cruise control regardless of whether the implementation is by analog or digital electronics.
 Cruise control is now mostly implemented digitally using a microprocessor-based controller.
 Cruise control is now mostly implemented digitally using a microprocessor-based controller.
 For such a system, proportional and integral control computations are performed numerically in the computer.
 The digital cruise control is inherently a discrete time system with samples of the vehicle speed taken at integer multiples of the sample period Ts.
 The block diagram for a representative digital cruise control is depicted in Figure 8.
 The plant variable being controlled is its forward speed V.
 The desired speed or set point for the controller is denoted Vd.
 The model for the plant as represented by its transfer function Hp(s) is taken to be the same as that developed above for the analog version of the cruise control.
 However, the actuator signal which is the ZOH output uðtÞ is a piecewise continuous signal (see Chapter 2): VðsÞ Hp ðsÞ ¼ uðsÞ ¼  gA Ka Mrw ðs þ KD =MÞ  ¼  K s þ s0  (15)  Vehicle-Motion Controls 391 where K¼  gA Ka Mru  so ¼ KD =M Using the same parameters as were used for the analog version of the cruise control, this model is given numerically by the following transfer function: Hp ðsÞ ¼  0:4129 ðs þ 0:0118Þ  (16)  As explained in Chapter 2, the z-transfer function for the combination of ZOH and plant (G(z)) is given by 1    GðzÞ ¼ ð1  z ÞZ  Hp ðsÞ s   (17)  From the methods of Chapter 2, the z-transform above can be found by expanding Hp(s)/s in a partial fraction series and then using the tables of Chapter 2.
0018 z0 ¼ eso T The continuous time PI control law is given by Z uðtÞ ¼ Kp eðtÞ þ KI  edt  (19)  In Chapter 7 under the section discussing control of variable valve phasing, it was shown that one discrete time z-transform of the integral term (using the trapezoidal integration rate) is given by  Z KI  Z   edt ¼  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  392  Chapter 8  The z-operational transfer function for the controller is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  uðzÞ eðzÞ  (20)  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ       KI T KI T Kp þ z  Kp  2 2 ðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼  (21)  Using the same gains (Kp ¼ 10 and KI ¼ 50) as for the continuous time control, one obtains Hc ðzÞ ¼  10:25z  9:75 ðz  1Þ  (22)  Chapter 2 also showed that the forward path z-transfer function HF(z) for a discrete time control system as shown in Figure 8.
0018 z0 ¼ eso T The continuous time PI control law is given by Z uðtÞ ¼ Kp eðtÞ þ KI  edt  (19)  In Chapter 7 under the section discussing control of variable valve phasing, it was shown that one discrete time z-transform of the integral term (using the trapezoidal integration rate) is given by  Z KI  Z   edt ¼  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  392  Chapter 8  The z-operational transfer function for the controller is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  uðzÞ eðzÞ  (20)  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ       KI T KI T Kp þ z  Kp  2 2 ðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼  (21)  Using the same gains (Kp ¼ 10 and KI ¼ 50) as for the continuous time control, one obtains Hc ðzÞ ¼  10:25z  9:75 ðz  1Þ  (22)  Chapter 2 also showed that the forward path z-transfer function HF(z) for a discrete time control system as shown in Figure 8.
0018 z0 ¼ eso T The continuous time PI control law is given by Z uðtÞ ¼ Kp eðtÞ þ KI  edt  (19)  In Chapter 7 under the section discussing control of variable valve phasing, it was shown that one discrete time z-transform of the integral term (using the trapezoidal integration rate) is given by  Z KI  Z   edt ¼  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  392  Chapter 8  The z-operational transfer function for the controller is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  uðzÞ eðzÞ  (20)  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ       KI T KI T Kp þ z  Kp  2 2 ðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼  (21)  Using the same gains (Kp ¼ 10 and KI ¼ 50) as for the continuous time control, one obtains Hc ðzÞ ¼  10:25z  9:75 ðz  1Þ  (22)  Chapter 2 also showed that the forward path z-transfer function HF(z) for a discrete time control system as shown in Figure 8.
0018 z0 ¼ eso T The continuous time PI control law is given by Z uðtÞ ¼ Kp eðtÞ þ KI  edt  (19)  In Chapter 7 under the section discussing control of variable valve phasing, it was shown that one discrete time z-transform of the integral term (using the trapezoidal integration rate) is given by  Z KI  Z   edt ¼  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  392  Chapter 8  The z-operational transfer function for the controller is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  uðzÞ eðzÞ  (20)  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ       KI T KI T Kp þ z  Kp  2 2 ðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼  (21)  Using the same gains (Kp ¼ 10 and KI ¼ 50) as for the continuous time control, one obtains Hc ðzÞ ¼  10:25z  9:75 ðz  1Þ  (22)  Chapter 2 also showed that the forward path z-transfer function HF(z) for a discrete time control system as shown in Figure 8.
0018 z0 ¼ eso T The continuous time PI control law is given by Z uðtÞ ¼ Kp eðtÞ þ KI  edt  (19)  In Chapter 7 under the section discussing control of variable valve phasing, it was shown that one discrete time z-transform of the integral term (using the trapezoidal integration rate) is given by  Z KI  Z   edt ¼  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ  392  Chapter 8  The z-operational transfer function for the controller is given by Hc ðzÞ ¼  Hc ðzÞ ¼ Kp þ  uðzÞ eðzÞ  (20)  KI Ts ðz þ 1Þ 2ðz  1Þ       KI T KI T Kp þ z  Kp  2 2 ðz  1Þ  Hc ðzÞ ¼  (21)  Using the same gains (Kp ¼ 10 and KI ¼ 50) as for the continuous time control, one obtains Hc ðzÞ ¼  10:25z  9:75 ðz  1Þ  (22)  Chapter 2 also showed that the forward path z-transfer function HF(z) for a discrete time control system as shown in Figure 8.
4 is given by HF ðzÞ ¼  dVðzÞ eðzÞ  ¼ Hc ðzÞGðzÞ ¼  (23)  0:0423z2  0:0826z þ :0403 z3  2:999z2 þ 2:998z  0:9999  Assuming an ideal sensor for which Hs(s) ¼ 1, the closed-loop gain z-transform function HCL(z) is given by HCL ðzÞ ¼  HF ðzÞ 1 þ HF ðzÞ  0:0423z2  0:0826z þ :0403 ¼ 3 z  2:9576z2 þ 2:9172z  0:9596 The poles of this closed-loop transfer function are z1 ¼ 1:000 z2 ¼ 0:9788 þ 0:0402i z3 ¼ 0:9788  0:0402i  (24)  Vehicle-Motion Controls 393 Since all poles are either on or inside the unit circle ðjzj ¼ 1Þ, the closed-loop cruise control system is stable.
 The dynamic response for this discrete time cruise control system can be found by evaluating its response to a step change in the input.
, at sample k1 where k1 ¼ 200), the cruise control set point is changed by a step increase of 10 to 70 MPH.
5: Response of digital cruise control to step change in set speed.
 We consider next the implementation of the digital cruise control system in actual hardware.
 The vehicle speed sensor and the actuator are analog and can either be modeled as continuous or discrete time devices (examples of each are discussed below) and the control system is digital.
 This is the set point for the controller.
  Hardware Implementation Issues The computer continuously reads the actual vehicle speed, V, and generates an error, en, at the sample time, tn: en ¼ Vd  Vðtn Þ A control signal, un, is computed that has the following form: un ¼ Kp en þ K1  M X  enm  (28)  m¼1  This sum, which is computed in the cruise control computer, is then multiplied by the integral gain KI and added to the most recent error multiplied by the proportional gain Kp to form the control signal.
  Hardware Implementation Issues The computer continuously reads the actual vehicle speed, V, and generates an error, en, at the sample time, tn: en ¼ Vd  Vðtn Þ A control signal, un, is computed that has the following form: un ¼ Kp en þ K1  M X  enm  (28)  m¼1  This sum, which is computed in the cruise control computer, is then multiplied by the integral gain KI and added to the most recent error multiplied by the proportional gain Kp to form the control signal.
  Hardware Implementation Issues The computer continuously reads the actual vehicle speed, V, and generates an error, en, at the sample time, tn: en ¼ Vd  Vðtn Þ A control signal, un, is computed that has the following form: un ¼ Kp en þ K1  M X  enm  (28)  m¼1  This sum, which is computed in the cruise control computer, is then multiplied by the integral gain KI and added to the most recent error multiplied by the proportional gain Kp to form the control signal.
 The computed discrete time control signal un then must be converted to a piecewise continuous form uðtÞ suitable to operate the actuator (via a ZOH).
 It should be noted that uðtÞ corresponds to the control signal u for the continuous time linear cruise control above.
 It should be noted that uðtÞ corresponds to the control signal u for the continuous time linear cruise control above.
 The operation of the cruise control system can be further understood by examining the vehicle speed sensor and the actuator in detail.
 The time interval during which the gate is closed is precisely controlled by the computer.
 The electrical signal in the binary counter is in a digital format that is suitable for reading by the cruise control computer.
  Throttle Actuator The throttle actuator is an electromechanical device that, in response to an electrical input from the controller (u), moves the throttle through some appropriate mechanical linkage.
 The stepper motor implementation operates similarly to the idle speed control actuator described in Chapter 7 and is essentially a digital device.
  Vehicle-Motion Controls 397 For a stepper motor-type actuator, the control signal (u) is converted to a pair of pulse sequences to drive the A and B coils (see Chapter 6).
 Normally the pulse signal is generated in the digital control system as part of its timing circuitry.
 The controller regulates throttle angle changes by setting the time interval Ta during which pulses are sent to the stepper motor.
 The actuation time interval is proportional to un : Ta ðnÞ ¼ KT uu  (31)  where KT is a constant for the control system.
 For the linearized vehicle model, the change in brake torque dTb(n) is approximated linearly proportional to dqt(n) (for relatively small dqt at cruise condition): dTb ðnÞ ¼ Kb dqt ðnÞ ¼ Kb Kq KT fp un  (33)  A dynamic performance of the digital cruise control is as explained for the discrete time model given above where dTb(n) is a discrete time version of dTb(t).
 During cruise control operation, the throttle position is set automatically by the throttle actuator in response to the actuator signal generated in the control system.
 During cruise control operation, the throttle position is set automatically by the throttle actuator in response to the actuator signal generated in the control system.
 When an actuator input signal energizes the electromagnet in the control solenoid, the pressure control valve is pulled down and changes the actuator cylinder pressure p by providing a path to manifold pressure pm.
 When an actuator input signal energizes the electromagnet in the control solenoid, the pressure control valve is pulled down and changes the actuator cylinder pressure p by providing a path to manifold pressure pm.
 This is done by rapidly switching the pressure control valve between the outside air port, which provides atmospheric pressure, and the manifold pressure port, the pressure of which is lower than atmospheric pressure.
 In one implementation of a throttle actuator, the actuator control signal Vc is a variable-duty-cycle type of signal like that discussed for the fuel injector actuator.
 The cruise control computer generates actuator control signal Vc ðtÞ ¼ VH tk  t  tk þ s ¼ 0 tk þ s < t < tkþ1 The duty cycle dp is given by dp ¼  s ðtkþ1  tk Þ  (35)  where tk is the periodic cycle time for speed control in the cruise control computer.
 The cruise control computer generates actuator control signal Vc ðtÞ ¼ VH tk  t  tk þ s ¼ 0 tk þ s < t < tkþ1 The duty cycle dp is given by dp ¼  s ðtkþ1  tk Þ  (35)  where tk is the periodic cycle time for speed control in the cruise control computer.
 The cruise control computer generates actuator control signal Vc ðtÞ ¼ VH tk  t  tk þ s ¼ 0 tk þ s < t < tkþ1 The duty cycle dp is given by dp ¼  s ðtkþ1  tk Þ  (35)  where tk is the periodic cycle time for speed control in the cruise control computer.
 The cruise control computer generates actuator control signal Vc ðtÞ ¼ VH tk  t  tk þ s ¼ 0 tk þ s < t < tkþ1 The duty cycle dp is given by dp ¼  s ðtkþ1  tk Þ  (35)  where tk is the periodic cycle time for speed control in the cruise control computer.
 This duty cycle (dp) is proportional to control signal un.
 The average pressure (pav) in the actuator cylinder chamber (averaged over a period (Tav) corresponding to several cycles) is given by 1 pav ðtÞ ¼ Tav  Zt  pi ðt0 Þdt0  tTav  (36)  ¼ pa þ ðpm  pa Þdp Since pm is a function of engine operating conditions, the control system continuously adjusts dp to maintain cruise speed at the desired value Vd.
 This average pressure and, consequently, the piston force are proportional to the duty cycle of the valve control signal Vc.
 The duty cycle is in turn proportional to the control signal un (explained above) that is computed from the sampled error signal en.
 This type of duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator is ideally suited for use in digital control systems.
 This type of duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator is ideally suited for use in digital control systems.
 If used in an analog control system, the analog control signal must first be converted to a duty-cycle control signal.
 If used in an analog control system, the analog control signal must first be converted to a duty-cycle control signal.
 If used in an analog control system, the analog control signal must first be converted to a duty-cycle control signal.
 In fact, with both in the closed-loop control system, each contributes to the total system phase shift and gain and must be considered during system design.
  400  Chapter 8  Cruise Control Electronics Cruise control can be implemented electronically in various ways, including with a microcontroller, with special-purpose digital electronics or with analog electronics.
  400  Chapter 8  Cruise Control Electronics Cruise control can be implemented electronically in various ways, including with a microcontroller, with special-purpose digital electronics or with analog electronics.
 It can also be implemented (in proportional control strategy alone) with an electromechanical speed governor.
 The physical configuration for a digital, microprocessor-based cruise control is depicted in Figure 8.
9 has a digital controller that is often called a microcontroller since it is implemented with a microprocessor operating under program control that is a part of the system design.
9 has a digital controller that is often called a microcontroller since it is implemented with a microprocessor operating under program control that is a part of the system design.
9 has a digital controller that is often called a microcontroller since it is implemented with a microprocessor operating under program control that is a part of the system design.
 The output from the controller (i.
, the control signal) is sent via the I/O (on one of its output ports) to so-called driver electronics.
 The latter electronics receives this control signal and generates a signal of the correct format and power level to operate the actuator (as explained below).
 A microprocessor-based cruise control system performs all of the required control law computations digitally under program control.
 A microprocessor-based cruise control system performs all of the required control law computations digitally under program control.
 A microprocessor-based cruise control system performs all of the required control law computations digitally under program control.
 For example, a PI control strategy is  Figure 8.
9: Digital cruise control configuration.
 In performing this task, the controller continuously receives samples of the speed error en.
 This sampling occurs at a sufficiently high rate to be able to adjust the control signal to the actuator in time to compensate for changes in operating condition or to disturbances.
 At each sample the controller reads the most recent error and then performs the control law computations necessary to generate an actuator signal un.
 At each sample the controller reads the most recent error and then performs the control law computations necessary to generate an actuator signal un.
 As explained earlier that error is multiplied by the proportional gain Kp, yielding the proportional term in the control law.
 It also computes the sum of a number of M previous error samples (the exact sum is chosen by the control system designer in accordance with the allowable steady-state error and the available computation time).
 Then this sum is multiplied by a constant KI and added to the proportional term, yielding the control signal.
 The control signal un at this point is simply a number that is stored in a memory location in the digital controller.
 The control signal un at this point is simply a number that is stored in a memory location in the digital controller.
 The use of this number by the electronic circuitry that drives the throttle actuator to regulate vehicle speed depends on the configuration of the particular control system and on the actuator used by that system.
  Stepper Motor-based Actuator Electronics For example, in the case of a stepper motor actuator, the actuator driver electronics reads the control variable un and then generates a sequence of pulses to the pair of windings on the stepper motor (with the correct relative phasing) at frequency fp as explained above to cause the stepper motor to either advance or retard the throttle setting as required to bring the error toward zero.
 The basic idea for this circuitry is to drive the stepper motor in such a way as to advance or retard the throttle in accordance with the control signal un that is stored in memory.
 Just as the controller periodically updates the actuator control signal, the stepper motor driver electronics continually adjusts the throttle by an amount determined by this actuator signal.
 Just as the controller periodically updates the actuator control signal, the stepper motor driver electronics continually adjusts the throttle by an amount determined by this actuator signal.
10: Stepper motor actuator electronics for cruise control.
 The number of cycles of these two phases is controlled by a logical signal (Z(Ta)) in Figure 8.
  Vehicle-Motion Controls 403 To control the number of steps, the controller loads a binary value into the binary counter.
  Vehicle-Motion Controls 403 To control the number of steps, the controller loads a binary value into the binary counter.
 By loading signed binary numbers into the binary counter, the cruise controller regulates the amount and direction of movement of the stepper motor and thereby the corresponding movement of the throttle.
  Vacuum-Operated Actuator The driver electronics for a cruise control based on a vacuum-operated system generates a variable-duty-cycle signal as described above.
 In this type of system, the duty cycle at any time is proportional to the control signal as explained above.
 For example, if at any given instant a large positive error exists between the command and actual signal, then a relatively large control signal will be generated.
 This control signal will cause the driver electronics to produce a large duty-cycle signal to operate the solenoid so that most of the time the actuator cylinder chamber is nearly at manifold vacuum level.
 It should be emphasized that, regardless of the actuator type used, a microprocessor-based cruise control system will: 1.
 Compute a control signal using P, PI, or PID control law.
 Compute a control signal using P, PI, or PID control law.
 Send the control signal to the driver electronics.
  (37)  404  Chapter 8  An example of electronics for a cruise control system that is basically analog is shown in Figure 8.
11: Analog cruise control configuration.
 The sensor voltage also provides the feedback signal to the error amplifier of this PI control system.
 Inverting the sum restores the correct sense, or polarity, to the control signal.
 The voltage-to-duty-cycle converter is a voltage-controlled oscillator which generates an output wave form at frequency fp with duty cycle which is proportional to Vout.
 Voltage Vc, representing the vehicle speed at which the driver wishes to set the cruise controller, is sampled and it charges capacitor C.
11a) is used to disable the speed controller by interrupting the control signal to the throttle actuator.
11a) is used to disable the speed controller by interrupting the control signal to the throttle actuator.
 Switch S2 disables the system whenever the ignition is turned off, the controller is turned off, or the brake pedal is pressed.
 The controller is switched on when the driver presses the speed set switch S1.
 As just mentioned, pressing the brake pedal turns off or disables the electronic control.
 In certain cruise control configurations that use a vacuum-operated throttle actuator, the brake pedal also mechanically opens a separate valve that is located in a hose connected to the throttle actuator cylinder.
 This ensures a fast and complete shutdown of the speed control system whenever the driver presses the brake pedal.
  Advanced Cruise Control The cruise control system previously described is adequate for maintaining constant speed, provided that any required deceleration can be achieved by a throttle reduction (i.
 For cars equipped with a conventional cruise control system, the driver has to apply braking to hold speed.
 An advanced cruise control (ACC) system has a means of automatic brake application whenever deceleration with throttle input alone is inadequate.
 In cruise control mode, the ACC controller regulates the throttle (as explained above for a conventional cruise control) as well as the brake system via electrical output signals and in response to inputs, including the vehicle speed sensor and set cruise speed switch.
 In cruise control mode, the ACC controller regulates the throttle (as explained above for a conventional cruise control) as well as the brake system via electrical output signals and in response to inputs, including the vehicle speed sensor and set cruise speed switch.
 In cruise control mode, the ACC controller regulates the throttle (as explained above for a conventional cruise control) as well as the brake system via electrical output signals and in response to inputs, including the vehicle speed sensor and set cruise speed switch.
 motor) output of the controller to the motor, causing the pump to send more brake fluid (under pressure) through the apply valve (maintained open) to the wheel cylinder.
 A linearized model for the vehicle traveling on a straight road with vehicle speed V ¼ Vd þ dV is given by MdV_ þ KD dV þ Mgq ¼ KB pB =rw ¼ KB KA u=rw  (42)  where KA is the brake pressure actuator constant Vd is the cruise speed set point, and u the ACC control signal.
 If a PI control law is assumed for this ACC automatic braking mode, the control signal is given by Z (43) u ¼ Kp e þ KI edt where e ¼ Vd  V ¼error signal ¼ dV, where V is the actual vehicle speed.
 If a PI control law is assumed for this ACC automatic braking mode, the control signal is given by Z (43) u ¼ Kp e þ KI edt where e ¼ Vd  V ¼error signal ¼ dV, where V is the actual vehicle speed.
 Substituting the control signal model into the linearized vehicle mode and taking the Laplace transform of the resulting equation yield the following:     KD KB KA KI dVðsÞ þ gq ¼  Kp þ dVðsÞ sþ M rw M s  (44)  Solving for dV(s) yields dVðsÞ ¼  gsjqj  KD KB KA Kp KB KA KI 2 s þ þ sþ M rw M rw M   (45)  Note the similarity to the model for cruise control developed earlier in which the actuator drives the throttle plate angle.
 Substituting the control signal model into the linearized vehicle mode and taking the Laplace transform of the resulting equation yield the following:     KD KB KA KI dVðsÞ þ gq ¼  Kp þ dVðsÞ sþ M rw M s  (44)  Solving for dV(s) yields dVðsÞ ¼  gsjqj  KD KB KA Kp KB KA KI 2 s þ þ sþ M rw M rw M   (45)  Note the similarity to the model for cruise control developed earlier in which the actuator drives the throttle plate angle.
 The dynamic response of a car with ACC traveling along a straight horizontal road and encountering a steep downgrade (with  Vehicle-Motion Controls 409 slope q ¼ jqj) is similar to that for an ordinary cruise control encountering a sudden change in slope except that the speed initially increases and then comes to an asymptotic value.
 It is further assumed for simplicity that the ACC switches instantly to automatic braking mode (when the throttle closed switch signals the controller).
13 is a plot of vehicle speed for P-only control as well as PI control.
13 is a plot of vehicle speed for P-only control as well as PI control.
 The same coefficients are assumed for the controller and KB is taken to be four.
 Note that for P-only control, the speed increases to an asymptotic value of about 67 MPH.
 However, for PI control, the speed initially increases, then with applied brakes decreases with small undershoot reaching the desired cruise speed of 60 MPH.
 The action of various control laws was described in Chapter 1.
 In such conditions, panic braking by the driver (in non-ABS-equipped cars) results in reduced braking effectiveness and, typically, loss of directional control due to the tendency of the wheels to lock (i.
 In addition to the normal brake components, including brake pedal, master cylinder, vacuum boost, wheel cylinders, calipers/disks, and brake lines, this system has a set of angular speed sensors at each wheel, an electronic control module, and a hydraulic brake pressure modulator (regulator).
 The lateral force that maintains directional control of the car is shown as FL in Figure 8.
 For wet or icy roads, mL at s ¼ 1 is so low that the lateral force often is insufficient to maintain directional control of the vehicle.
 However, directional control can often be maintained even in poor braking conditions if slip is optimally controlled.
 However, directional control can often be maintained even in poor braking conditions if slip is optimally controlled.
 In an exemplary ABS configuration, control over slip is affected by regulating the brake line pressure under electronic control.
 In an exemplary ABS configuration, control over slip is affected by regulating the brake line pressure under electronic control.
 During heavy braking under marginal conditions, sufficient braking force is applied to cause wheel lock-up (in the absence of ABS control).
 After the peak wheel torque is sensed electronically, the electronic control system commands that brake pressure be reduced (via the brake pressure modulator).
 The ABS control laws and algorithms are, naturally, proprietary for each manufacturer.
 Rather than dealing with such proprietary issues here, an ABS control concept is presented here based upon a paper by the author of this book and which has demonstrated successful ABS operation in laboratory (wheel dynamometer) tests.
 This discussion can be considered exemplary of much of the mechanical dynamics as well as control algorithms.
 An ideal ABS control would maintain braking force/torque such that slip would remain at exactly the optimum slip (i.
 However, a suboptimal control system having very near optimal performance can be achieved by cycling brake pressure such that slip cycles up and down about the optimum as depicted qualitatively in Figure 8.
 The present exemplary ABS control is based upon the use of a so-called sliding mode observer (SMO).
 The SMO generates a very close estimate of dTb such that the control logic can detect that extremal values for the actual differential torque have occurred by detecting extremal values of the SMO estimate ðdT^b Þ.
 This estimate is the input to the control algorithm for regulating brake pressure.
 The actual control algorithm for applying or releasing brakes is based upon the estimate of dTb.
 One control scheme incorporates an extremal value detector applied to dT^b .
 Upon detection of this extremum, the control generates a command signal to release brake pressure (using a mechanism described below).
 Upon detecting this condition, the control system generates a signal that causes brake pressure to be reapplied.
 During ABS operation, the control logic essentially detects that slip has increased beyond so, and at some point between so and the upper limit point of slip for ABS (as shown in Figure 8.
17), this logic detects an impending wheel lock condition and generates control signals that cause brake pressure to rapidly decrease.
 In an actual ABS, the brakes are individually controlled at each wheel.
 Separate control of each wheel is required because during braking, the inertial forces can result in different normal force (N) at each wheel.
 The other is to maintain sufficient lateral friction coefficient (mL) for good directional control of the vehicle during stopping.
  Vehicle-Motion Controls 417 P  A  K BP  MC  BV  DV  V1  V2  RV  V3  wheel cylinder WC  electronic control  S  Figure 8.
18 the notation is as follows:  BP MC K BV DV RV P A S WC V1,V2,V3  Brake pedal Master cylinder Brake fluid reservoir Blocking valve Pressure dump valve Repressurization valve Pump Accumulator Wheel speed sensor Wheel cylinder Actuator control signals.
  During braking with ABS control, the driver is assumed to apply brake pressure to the line connecting MC and WC.
 Whenever the ABS control detects a potential wheel lock-up owing to slip s > so (due to the negative dmb/ds), it generates nonzero control signals V1, V2, and V3 in a precise sequence.
 Whenever the ABS control detects a potential wheel lock-up owing to slip s > so (due to the negative dmb/ds), it generates nonzero control signals V1, V2, and V3 in a precise sequence.
 The control sends a voltage V1 to BV which causes it to switch to a brake pressure-blocked position.
 A few milliseconds after the BV is activated, the control generates a voltage V2 that activates the DV which switches it to its second position.
 This appropriate time is the time at which the control system detects an extremum in dT^b for brakes “off” (or low Tb).
 When the controller detects this condition, it initially sets control voltage V2 ¼ 0, thereby deactivating DV.
 When the controller detects this condition, it initially sets control voltage V2 ¼ 0, thereby deactivating DV.
 A few milliseconds after V2 is set to zero, the controller generates voltage V3 that activates the repressurization valve.
 The wheel speed begins to drop until the control detects incipient wheel lock (e.
 At this point, the ABS reduces brake pressure and the wheel speed increases until the control reaches the condition to reapply brake pressure.
 However, in most cases the lateral force is large enough to maintain directional control, thereby permitting the driver to steer the vehicle.
 In some antilock brake systems, the mean value of the slip oscillations is shifted below so, sacrificing some braking effectiveness to enhance directional control.
  420  Chapter 8  Tire-Slip Controller Another benefit of the ABS is that the brake pressure modulator can be used for ACC as explained earlier as well as for tire-slip control.
 An electrohydraulic brake system was described in the section of this chapter devoted to advanced cruise control (ACC).
  422  Chapter 8  In electronically controlled suspension systems, this damping can be varied depending on driving conditions and road roughness characteristics.
 There are two major classes of electronic suspension control systems: active and semi-active.
 power is absorbed by the shock absorber under control of a microcontroller).
 power is absorbed by the shock absorber under control of a microcontroller).
 At the time of the writing of this book, electronic control of commercial suspension systems is primarily semi-active.
 A semi-active suspension controls the shock absorber damping to achieve the best possible ride without sacrificing handling performance.
 We consider next certain aspects of vehicle dynamics to understand the role played by electronically controlled suspension.
 Rather, the goal here is to focus on electronic control of the suspension and to illustrate the corresponding aspect of vehicle dynamics for a few representative maneuvers.
 For an understanding of the operation of electronic suspension control, it is helpful to review the operation of a strut (shock absorber) with reference to Figure 8.
 Before proceeding with a discussion of electronically controlled strut damping, it is necessary to include tire dynamics in our vehicle dynamic model.
 The tire dynamics in the vehicle dynamic models can be introduced adequately for the purposes of reviewing electronically controlled suspension by considering a single strut configuration.
 running condition, control objective, optimum condition, as well as optimum z and representative compact car value.
 An electrical signal from the suspension control system operates the actuator which determines the strut aperture.
 This hypothetical electronically controlled strut provides the mechanism by which suspension damping is regulated.
 In order to be effective in electronically regulated strut damping, there must be an electronic control system that generates the actuator electrical signal.
 Although there are many potential control strategies for regulating shock absorber damping, we consider first switched damping as in our example.
 One control scheme that is potentially approachable to a continuously variable strut damping is based upon monitoring vehicle operational conditions.
 Whenever a~s exceeds a given level (possibly driver adjusted), the control system can generate a signal to operate strut apertures to lower this acceleration.
 Some vehicles, having electronically controlled suspension, are also equipped with pneumatic springs as a replacement for steel springs.
 In conjunction with a suitable control system, the pneumatic springs can automatically adjust the vehicle height to accommodate various vehicle loadings, as well as to increase spring “stiffness.
”  Electronic Suspension Control System The control system for an exemplar electronic suspension system is depicted in the block diagram of Figure 8.
  Vehicle-Motion Controls 445 The control system configuration in Figure 8.
 The control system typically is in the form of a microcontroller or microprocessor-based digital controller.
 The control system typically is in the form of a microcontroller or microprocessor-based digital controller.
 The control system typically is in the form of a microcontroller or microprocessor-based digital controller.
 The controller makes this evaluation based upon a~s or similar metrics for body motion.
 Under program control in accordance with the control strategy, the electronic control system generates output electrical signals to the various actuators.
 Under program control in accordance with the control strategy, the electronic control system generates output electrical signals to the various actuators.
 Under program control in accordance with the control strategy, the electronic control system generates output electrical signals to the various actuators.
 There are many possible control strategies and many of these are actually used in production vehicles.
 For the purposes of this book, it is perhaps most beneficial to present a representative control strategy that typifies features of a number of actual production systems.
 The important inputs to the vehicle suspension control system come from road roughnessinduced forces and inertial forces (due, for example, to cornering or maneuvering), steering inputs, and vehicle speed.
 In our hypothetical simplified control strategy, these inputs are considered separately.
 In this case, the control is based on the spectral content (frequency region) of the relative motion.
 The controller (under program control) calculates such variables as a~s or d~ (from the corresponding sensor’s data).
 The controller (under program control) calculates such variables as a~s or d~ (from the corresponding sensor’s data).
  446  Chapter 8  If, in addition, the vehicle is equipped with an accelerometer (usually located in the car body near the center of gravity) and with motor-driven variable-aperture shock absorbers, then an additional control strategy is possible.
 In this latter control strategy, the shock absorber apertures are adjusted to minimize sprung mass acceleration in the 2e8 Hz frequency region, thereby providing optimum ride control.
 In this latter control strategy, the shock absorber apertures are adjusted to minimize sprung mass acceleration in the 2e8 Hz frequency region, thereby providing optimum ride control.
 However, at all times, the damping is adjusted to control unsprung mass motion to maintain wheel normal force variation at acceptably low levels for safety reasons.
 Whenever a relatively large steering input is sensed (sometimes in conjunction with body roll angle and/or yaw rate measurement), such as during a cornering maneuver, then the control strategy switches to the smaller aperture, yielding a “stiffer” suspension and improved handling.
 This pressurized fluid is sent via hydraulic lines to a control valve (CV) mounted at some point on the steering shaft.
 On the other hand, electronic controls provide a relatively straightforward means of regulating boost to obtain desired results.
 Moreover, a digital power steering control system allows for the possibility of changing the boost vs.
 A control that adapts automatically to driving conditions is also achievable cost effectively.
 stepper motor) or a solenoid, possibly driven by a variable-dutycycle control signal (see Chapter 6).
 A digital control system C receives vehicle speed measurements via  MG  C  control  S  vehicle speed sensor  Figure 8.
 A digital control system C receives vehicle speed measurements via  MG  C  control  S  vehicle speed sensor  Figure 8.
  Vehicle-Motion Controls 449 speed sensors and generates a motor control signal to achieve the desired speed/boost profile.
 Electronic control of electric boost systems is straightforward and can be accomplished without any energy conversion from electrical power to mechanical actuation.
 Moreover, electronic control offers very sophisticated adaptive control in which the system can adapt to the driving environment.
 Moreover, electronic control offers very sophisticated adaptive control in which the system can adapt to the driving environment.
  Four-Wheel Steering Electronically controlled power steering also has the capability for four-wheel steering (4WS).
 An example of an electronically controlled steering system that has had commercial production is for four-wheel steering systems (4WS).
 The rear wheels are steered under the control of a microcontroller via an actuator.
 The rear wheels are steered under the control of a microcontroller via an actuator.
 We next develop a model for a 4WS (with electronic controls and for which dR can be nonzero) that includes roll dynamics.
 The microcontroller (C) determines the desired rear steering angle dR under program control as a function of speed and front steering angle via actuator A.
 The microcontroller (C) determines the desired rear steering angle dR under program control as a function of speed and front steering angle via actuator A.
 In an exemplary 4WS control strategy for speeds below 10 mph, the rear steering angle is in the opposite direction to the front steering angle.
 This control strategy has the effect of  Vehicle-Motion Controls 455 decreasing the car’s turning radius by as much as 30% from the value it has for front wheel steering only.
 The control strategy in this simulation is for the rear wheel deflection dR ¼ 0:1dF .
 In fact, such a control strategy is not necessarily desirable for passenger car  456  Chapter 8  Figure 8.
  electronically controlled 4WS.
 Another passenger car control strategy might be to steer the rear wheels opposite to the front wheels for a short period and then to steer them in the same direction (although at  Vehicle-Motion Controls 457 a smaller angle).
 Many control strategies can be evaluated in simulation using models such as are presented above or (preferably) more accurate models than above with respect to nonlinearities and un-modeled dynamics.
  Summary This chapter has reviewed some basic theory for vehicle-motion control.
 In practice and in production vehicles, the models presented here would not be adequate for development of actual control systems.
 There is abundant literature available through the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) and its publication services for the reader who is interested in pursuing the advanced theory of vehicle-motion control.
 By the term instrumentation, we mean the equipment and devices that measure engine and other vehicle variables and parameters for control or to display their status to the driver.
 For example, whenever self-diagnosis of the engine control system detects a problem, such as a loss of signal from a sensor, a lamp illuminates the “Check Engine” message on the instrument panel.
  Modern Automotive Instrumentation The evolution of instrumentation in automobiles has been influenced by electronic technological advances in much the same way as the engine control system, which has already been discussed.
 Signal processing in contemporary vehicle instrumentation is performed in a digital system under program control.
 The powertrain control system, for example, continuously performs self-diagnosis operations (see Chapter 10).
 ABS, airbag, and cruise control).
 can be implemented  466  Chapter 9 analog sensors x1  S1  x2  S2  MUX v1  BC  S1 v2  D S2  digital system  A/D EOC  xN  SN  A  vN SN  decode control  Figure 9.
 The digital system controls sequencing by generating data select line signals as shown in Figure 9.
 The brightness is controlled by varying the voltage on the accelerating grid.
16: Brightness control range for vacuum-fluorescent display.
 The intensity of the active LCD is controlled by circuitry connected within the microstructure.
 The active LCD is selected via horizontal and vertical control circuitry.
 An efficient use of this computer involves a scanning method of presenting pixel data in a stand-alone display controller as explained below in the form of a raster-type scan.
 The control of whether a pixel is active or not in this hypothetical configuration is controlled by the digital display via logical signals Er and Ec, which either enable the signal for a given column or disable it via separate AND gate for each column output.
 The control of whether a pixel is active or not in this hypothetical configuration is controlled by the digital display via logical signals Er and Ec, which either enable the signal for a given column or disable it via separate AND gate for each column output.
 xm,n) is to be activated the logical signals Er and Ec are set high by the controller at time tmn.
 In the above-described raster-type scan operation of a flat panel display, the counters and “clocks” at frequencies fx fy are internal to the digital display controller.
 Whenever it is to  Automotive Instrumentation and Telematics  487  S1 S2  Sk  control for digital instrumentation system  fPx  row counter/ decoder  Display  Er Ec  column counter/ decoder  fPx  Figure 9.
19: Block diagram for flat panel display controller.
 In this system, the digital instrumentation system, which is microprocessor based and which is under program control, receives input signals from all necessary sensors.
 The digital control system performs all signal-processing operations, computing in this process an output appropriate for displaying each variable being measured and storing this value in RAM.
 In this type of display rather than control of each pixel for every display cycle the digital instrumentation system uses an intermediate RAM that we call a video RAM.
 Here, the term random access refers to the access of video RAM by the controller.
 This logical value Enm corresponding to the pixel at xm,yn is determined by the digital system under program control.
 We next consider the structure and operation of an FPD controller that functions in conjunction with the instrumentation computer to cause the scanning display to be generated.
  A simplified block diagram for a system incorporating an FPD-type display with the associated controller is depicted in Figure 9.
 The output of the instrumentation computer controls the flat panel display, working through flat panel display controller (FPC).
 The output of the instrumentation computer controls the flat panel display, working through flat panel display controller (FPC).
21, it is assumed that the instrumentation computer communicates with the FPC via data and address buses (DB and AB), and controls its operation via a serial link along a line or set of lines labeled receiver/transmitter (R/T).
 The controller obtains data from the video RAM and converts them to the relevant video signal (Vc).
 At the same time, the controller activates the horizontal and vertical lines for each pixel in synchronism with the video signal.
 The flat panel controller in the example system (Figure 9.
21) itself incorporates an MPU for controlling the FPD.
 The data to be displayed are stored in the display RAM via the system buses under control of the instrumentation computer.
 The operation of the MPU is controlled by programs stored in a display ROM (DROM).
 The various components of the display controller are internally connected by means of data and address buses similar to those used in the instrumentation computer.
  490  Chapter 9  The operation of the display controller is under control of the instrumentation computer.
  490  Chapter 9  The operation of the display controller is under control of the instrumentation computer.
 This computer transfers data that are to be displayed to the video RAM, via address bus AB and data bus DB and signals the display controller via control R/T.
 This computer transfers data that are to be displayed to the video RAM, via address bus AB and data bus DB and signals the display controller via control R/T.
 The FPC outputs a clock signal at frequency fc to the horizontal counter/decoder and initiates counting via control D in Figure 9.
  Automotive Instrumentation and Telematics  491  parameters that have traditionally been available to the driver, the FPD-type display can present engine data for diagnostic purposes (see Chapter 10), vehicle comfort control system parameters, and entertainment system variables.
 The actual fuel quantity is denoted F; the sensor voltage v0 is a known function of F for any fuel/angle sensor combination such that the sensor terminal voltage is given by: v0 ¼ fF ðFÞ  (20)  The instrumentation computer (under program control) computes the sampled measurement Fn from vn: Fn ¼ fF1 ðvn Þ  (21)  The short-term time average of fuel quantity Fav is given by Fav ðnÞ ¼  N N 1 X 1 X Fnm ¼ f 1 ðvnm Þ N m¼1 N m¼1 F  (22)  The sloshing effect of fuel on fuel gauge indicated value can be reduced by filtering the fuel sensor output.
 The oil pressure limit is determined from load or crankshaft speed measurements that are already available in the engine control system.
  Vehicle Speed Measurement An example of a digital speed sensor has already been described in Chapter 8 for a cruise control system.
 The time interval during which sensor output pulses are counted is determined by a control signal G from the instrumentation control system (ICS).
 The time interval during which sensor output pulses are counted is determined by a control signal G from the instrumentation control system (ICS).
32 is functionally an electronically controlled switch (e.
 open or closed) is controlled by the binary valued signal represented by logical variable G.
 The (ICS) periodically outputs this logical control signal such that G ¼ 1 corresponds to closed gate for which sensor pulses are sent to the counter and G ¼ 0 corresponds to the gate open and counting is inhibited as given below: G ¼ 1 tk  t  tk þ s ¼ 0 tk þ s < t < tkþ1 tkþ1  tk ¼ Ts ¼ sample period  (31)  During the period in which G ¼ 1, each sensor pulse causes the counter to increment by one.
 Thus, at time tk + s the counter contains count P where o n P ¼ P fp sR  (32)  electronic gate V  speed sensor  fp  binary counter G Instrumentation control system  Figure 9.
 Under program control, the vehicle speed is computed from the counter contents as given below: V¼  P ks s  (33)  where ks is the speed sensor constant given above in Eqn (30).
 For example, vehicle speed measurements are used by the instrumentation subsystem, powertrain control, and possibly vehicle suspension or steering subsystems.
 touch pad) for operator control.
 For example, wheel speed measurements are primary variables for ABS systems and are also useful in electronic transmission control.
 The CAN is an arbitrating protocol which requires a very precise control of various timing events in the exchange of inter-ECU information.
 Other inputs that are obtained by the computer from other parts of the control system are 1.
  The GPS System Structure The structure of the GPS navigation system consists of three major segments: (1) the space segment (the satellites), (2) the control segment, and (3) the user receiver systems.
 A major function of the control segment is to periodically upload to each satellite data from which this position can be computed.
 The control segment configuration is depicted in Figure 9.
 The data and corrections obtained by these monitor stations are sent to the master control.
 The satellites are continuously controlled via the master control to avoid cumulative errors that would occur in the absence of this control function.
 The satellites are continuously controlled via the master control to avoid cumulative errors that would occur in the absence of this control function.
 The satellites are continuously controlled via the master control to avoid cumulative errors that would occur in the absence of this control function.
  Automotive Diagnostics In certain automobile models, the instrumentation computer can perform the important function of diagnosis of the electronic engine control system as well as other subsystems.
 One level is used during manufacturing to test the system, and another level is used by mechanics or interested car owners to diagnose engine control system problems.
 However, the Clean Air Act affected not only the emissions produced by automobiles but also the complexity of the engine control systems and, as a result, the complexity of automobile maintenance and repair.
 The change from traditional fluidic/pneumatic engine controls to microprocessor-based electronic engine controls was a direct result of the need to control automobile emissions, and has been chronicled throughout this book.
 The change from traditional fluidic/pneumatic engine controls to microprocessor-based electronic engine controls was a direct result of the need to control automobile emissions, and has been chronicled throughout this book.
 The change from traditional fluidic/pneumatic engine controls to microprocessor-based electronic engine controls was a direct result of the need to control automobile emissions, and has been chronicled throughout this book.
 However, little has been said thus far about the diagnostic problems involved in electronically controlled engines.
 This type of diagnostics requires a fundamentally different approach than that for traditionally controlled engines because it requires more sophisticated equipment than was required for diagnostics in preemission control automobiles.
 This type of diagnostics requires a fundamentally different approach than that for traditionally controlled engines because it requires more sophisticated equipment than was required for diagnostics in preemission control automobiles.
 Some limited self-diagnostics have been available in power train control from the earliest days of microprocessor-based control systems.
 Some limited self-diagnostics have been available in power train control from the earliest days of microprocessor-based control systems.
 They require that the vehicle has within its electronic control/instrumentation systems the capability of essentially continuously monitoring the performance of the vehicle emission control systems.
 They require that the vehicle has within its electronic control/instrumentation systems the capability of essentially continuously monitoring the performance of the vehicle emission control systems.
 If the fault has the potential to degrade the emission control system beyond allowable limits, OBD II requires that the driver be alerted via a “check engine” message on the instrument panel.
 For example, the heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO; see Chapter 6) which is used for closed-loop fuel control can experience a failure or partial failure.
 For a warmed engine running with fuel control in closed-loop mode, the voltage waveform of the HEGO sensor will have certain patterns when the sensor is operating normally.
 For example, the fuel control  526  Chapter 10  system could have experienced a failure and could be unintentionally fueling the engine too rich or too lean.
 However, the power train control system can monitor fuel injector current and terminal voltage.
 The primary HEGO sensor for fuel control is located upstream of the catalytic converter.
 Recall from Chapter 7 that in closed-loop mode the fuel control continuously cycles from rich to lean of stoichiometry and from lean to rich.
 A calibration change in the MAF sensor can lead to misfueling (relative to stoichiometry) particularly in open-loop mode of fuel  Diagnostics and Occupant Protection  527  control.
 It is important to maintain proper fuel/air mixture regardless of the controller mode of operation.
 Unfortunately, the cost of adding extra sensors makes it unattractive to an automobile manufacturer to implement such a method unless these sensors were already in place for other  528  Chapter 10  control applications.
 see Chapter 7) that power train control uses numerous angular speed sensors.
 One method for detecting missing pulses uses the controller clock to record the time of occurrence tk(k ¼ 1, 2, .
 The controller can also obtain the differential time between successive pulses d tk ¼ tk  tk1 ;  k ¼ 1; 2 .
 coolant temperature) sensors are used in power train control whose accuracy affects emission control.
 coolant temperature) sensors are used in power train control whose accuracy affects emission control.
 As will be demonstrated below, the diagnostic capability provided in any modern microprocessor-based electronic control system (although somewhat limited) can provide valuable assistance to the service technician.
 These diagnostic functions are performed by the microprocessor under the control of stored programs, and are normally performed when the microprocessor is not fully committed to performing normal control calculations.
 These diagnostic functions are performed by the microprocessor under the control of stored programs, and are normally performed when the microprocessor is not fully committed to performing normal control calculations.
 At the same time, the controller generates or activates an FIL warning lamp (or similar display) on the instrument panel indicating that service is required provided the fault affects the emission control system or affects safety.
 At the same time, the controller generates or activates an FIL warning lamp (or similar display) on the instrument panel indicating that service is required provided the fault affects the emission control system or affects safety.
 In an onboard diagnostic system, if the electronic control module stores trouble codes that are automatically cleared by the microprocessor after a set number of engine cycles have occurred without a fault reappearing, then intermittent failure detection is precluded.
 Refer to Chapter 7 for a review of the role played by this important sensor in closed-loop fuel control.
 The next step in the flowchart involves testing the wiring harness from the HEGO to the engine control unit (ECU).
5 V, and that the electronic control system will not go into closed-loop operation (see Chapters 5 and 7) or that the transitions are too slow for closed-loop control to function.
5 V, and that the electronic control system will not go into closed-loop operation (see Chapters 5 and 7) or that the transitions are too slow for closed-loop control to function.
 The control unit is not processing the HEGO sensor signal.
57 V, tests are performed to determine whether the HEGO sensor or the control unit is faulty.
 The service technician must jumper the HEGO sensor leads together at the input to the control unit, simulating a sensor short circuit, and must read the sensor voltage value using the PSDT (or a suitable multi meter).
05 V, the control unit is functioning correctly and the HEGO sensor must be investigated for defects.
05 V, the control unit is faulty and should be replaced.
 A further test of the proper HEGO sensor dynamic (switching) operation as part of the engine control is illustrated in the flowchart of Figure 10.
 In this diagnostic procedure, the goal is to ascertain whether the HEGO sensor operation results in closed-loop mode of engine control.
 We consider, for example, the throttle position sensor which provides an important input to the electronic engine control as explained in Chapters 5, 6 and 7.
 For example, in a cruise control system, the brake pedal switch has the critical safety-related function of disconnecting the throttle actuator from the throttle linkage in a cruise control system (see Chapter 8) when the driver applies the brakes.
 For example, in a cruise control system, the brake pedal switch has the critical safety-related function of disconnecting the throttle actuator from the throttle linkage in a cruise control system (see Chapter 8) when the driver applies the brakes.
 If the display does not advance, then the control unit is not processing the brake switch signal and further diagnosis is required.
7 depicts the cruise control brake circuit diagram.
  Diagnostics and Occupant Protection  541  with ignition ON continuity check brake switch current  continuity both sides  continuity on one side  no continuity  with ignition on depress brake pedal and check continuity in circuit H  check adjustment on switch  check fuse  NO  IS there continuity  check for open in circuit H  YES  NO  replace cruise control switch  reset  IS adjustment correct  YES  NO  replace switch  NO  check for short circuits to ground in DCJ  are there short circuit  does fuse blow again  replace control system  YES  repair open in circuit C  YES  repair/replace circuit wire C  replace fuse and retest  YES  IS fuse OK  NO  repeat switch test  Figure 10.
  Diagnostics and Occupant Protection  541  with ignition ON continuity check brake switch current  continuity both sides  continuity on one side  no continuity  with ignition on depress brake pedal and check continuity in circuit H  check adjustment on switch  check fuse  NO  IS there continuity  check for open in circuit H  YES  NO  replace cruise control switch  reset  IS adjustment correct  YES  NO  replace switch  NO  check for short circuits to ground in DCJ  are there short circuit  does fuse blow again  replace control system  YES  repair open in circuit C  YES  repair/replace circuit wire C  replace fuse and retest  YES  IS fuse OK  NO  repeat switch test  Figure 10.
6: Cruise control brake circuit.
 The control unit tests the throttle switch, and advances the display to code 73 for normal operation.
 (5) With 75 displayed, the cruise control is switched from off to on and back to off, testing the cruise control switch.
 (5) With 75 displayed, the cruise control is switched from off to on and back to off, testing the cruise control switch.
 (6) With code 76 displayed and the cruise control switch on, depress and release the set/coast button.
 (7) With 77 displayed and with the cruise control instrument on, depress and release the resume/acceleration switch.
7: Cruise control brake circuit.
 (10) With 80 displayed, depress and release the rear defogger button on the climate control head.
8) is a logical (binary) variable that indicates whether the engine control system is operating in open or closed loop (i.
 A value of 1 corresponds to closed loop, which means that data from the HEGO sensor are fed back to the controller to be used in setting injector pulse duration.
  Onboard Diagnosis (OBD II) Onboard diagnosis has also been mandated by government regulation, particularly if a vehicle failure could damage emission control systems.
 This requirement is intended to ensure that the emission control system is functioning as intended.
  544  Chapter 10  Automotive emission control systems, which have been discussed in Chapters 5 and 7, consist of fuel and ignition control for the three-way catalytic converter, as well as controls for EGR, secondary air injection, and evaporative emission.
  544  Chapter 10  Automotive emission control systems, which have been discussed in Chapters 5 and 7, consist of fuel and ignition control for the three-way catalytic converter, as well as controls for EGR, secondary air injection, and evaporative emission.
  544  Chapter 10  Automotive emission control systems, which have been discussed in Chapters 5 and 7, consist of fuel and ignition control for the three-way catalytic converter, as well as controls for EGR, secondary air injection, and evaporative emission.
 The OBD II regulations require real-time monitoring of the performance of the emission control system components.
 The engine control system was programmed to interrupt fuel injection on one or two cylinders or on none.
 The specific hypothesis under any test was determined by the number of cylinders that were caused to be misfired in the associated control instrumentation (i.
 The diagnosis of electronic engine control systems by an expert system proceeds by following a set of rules that embody steps similar to the diagnostic charts in the shop manual.
 The system processes these codes logically under program control in accordance with the set of internally stored rules.
 In the case of automotive electronic engine control systems the experts include the design engineers, the test engineers and technicians, involved in the development of the control system.
 In the case of automotive electronic engine control systems the experts include the design engineers, the test engineers and technicians, involved in the development of the control system.
 The expert system of this example consists of three components: (1) A rule base of IF-THEN rules (2) A database of facts (3) A controlling mechanism.
 The controlling mechanism of this expert system determines which actions are to be taken and when they are to be performed.
 The controlling mechanism follows Step 1 and discovers that only R1 is in the conflict set.
 The evolution of such diagnostic systems may be heading in the direction of fully automated, rapid, and efficient diagnoses of problems in cars equipped with modern digital control systems.
 Closed-Loop Control: A control system in which the control signal that regulates the plant output is a function of the difference between the desired and actual values of the output variable being regulated.
 Closed-Loop Control: A control system in which the control signal that regulates the plant output is a function of the difference between the desired and actual values of the output variable being regulated.
 Closed-Loop Fuel Control: A fuel control mode where input air/fuel ratio is controlled by metering the fuel response to the rich-lean indications from an exhaust gas oxygen sensor.
 Closed-Loop Fuel Control: A fuel control mode where input air/fuel ratio is controlled by metering the fuel response to the rich-lean indications from an exhaust gas oxygen sensor.
 Control Variable: The output of the controller which is the input to the plant that regulates the output variable in accordance with the control law.
 Control Variable: The output of the controller which is the input to the plant that regulates the output variable in accordance with the control law.
 Differential Gain: The coefficient multiplying the time derivative of the error in a PID control law.
 EGO Sensor: A sensor is used in closed-loop fuel control systems to indicate rich or lean A/F.
 Electronic Carburetor: A fuel metering actuator in which the air/fuel ratio is controlled by continual variations of the metering rod position in response to an electronic control signal (now obsolete).
 Electronic Carburetor: A fuel metering actuator in which the air/fuel ratio is controlled by continual variations of the metering rod position in response to an electronic control signal (now obsolete).
 Instrumentation: Apparatus (often electronic) which is used for measurement or control, and for display of measurements or conditions.
 Integral Gain: The coefficient multiplying the integral of the error in a PI or PID control law.
 Lead/Lag Term: A control system phase compensation that provides a phase advance (lead) or delay (lag) in the control law.
 Lead/Lag Term: A control system phase compensation that provides a phase advance (lead) or delay (lag) in the control law.
 Limit Cycle: A mode of control system operation in which the controlled variable switches between a pair of limits with the average near the desired value.
 Limit Cycle: A mode of control system operation in which the controlled variable switches between a pair of limits with the average near the desired value.
 Microcomputer: A small computer which uses an integrated circuit microprocessor and related components capable of discrete time control applications MUX: Multiplexer; a type of electronic switch used to select one of several input lines and functionally connect that input to the MUX output.
 Op Code: A binary number that causes a specific microprocessor operation to occur when placed in the instruction decode circuit Open-Loop Control: A control mode in which the control or actuator signal is computed as a function of a measurement of an input.
 Op Code: A binary number that causes a specific microprocessor operation to occur when placed in the instruction decode circuit Open-Loop Control: A control mode in which the control or actuator signal is computed as a function of a measurement of an input.
 Open-Loop Fuel Control: A mode where engine input air/fuel ratio is controlled by measuring the mass flow rate of input air and adding the proper mass flow rate of fuel to obtain the desired air/fuel ratio.
 Plant: The system that is to be controlled in a control system.
 Plant: The system that is to be controlled in a control system.
 Proportional Gain: The component of a control (or actuating) signal that is proportional to the difference between the desired and actual output of a closed-loop control system.
 Proportional Gain: The component of a control (or actuating) signal that is proportional to the difference between the desired and actual output of a closed-loop control system.
 Reference Input: The input to a control system that corresponds to the desired plant output.
 TBFI: Throttle-body-fuel-injector; a fuel metering actuator in which the air/fuel ratio is controlled by injecting precisely controlled spurts of fuel into the air stream entering the intake manifold (now obsolete).
 TBFI: Throttle-body-fuel-injector; a fuel metering actuator in which the air/fuel ratio is controlled by injecting precisely controlled spurts of fuel into the air stream entering the intake manifold (now obsolete).
  Explain the purpose of the following systems: a)  control system  b)  instrumentation system  c)  communication system.
  yðsÞ HðsÞ  Given the PI control system depicted below:  x(t) input  Є  + –  Control Hc(s)  u  Plant Hp(s)  y(t) output  Sensor Hs(s)  assume the following component models: control: Hc ðsÞ ¼  uðsÞ K_ 1 ¼ Kp þ s ˛ðsÞ  0:04 plant: Hp ðsÞ ¼ 2 s þ 2s þ 0:75 sensor: Hs ðsÞ ¼ 1 a)  Show that the error ˛(x) ¼ next gain.
  yðsÞ HðsÞ  Given the PI control system depicted below:  x(t) input  Є  + –  Control Hc(s)  u  Plant Hp(s)  y(t) output  Sensor Hs(s)  assume the following component models: control: Hc ðsÞ ¼  uðsÞ K_ 1 ¼ Kp þ s ˛ðsÞ  0:04 plant: Hp ðsÞ ¼ 2 s þ 2s þ 0:75 sensor: Hs ðsÞ ¼ 1 a)  Show that the error ˛(x) ¼ next gain.
15 and with Kp as a variable, find the closed loop transfer function for this control system.
  a)  Show that a control system for a plant having a transfer function Hp(s) given by: Hp ðsÞ ¼  10 sðs þ 0:5Þ  and a proportional only controller is stable for any gain provided the feedback sensor is ideal (i.
  a)  Show that a control system for a plant having a transfer function Hp(s) given by: Hp ðsÞ ¼  10 sðs þ 0:5Þ  and a proportional only controller is stable for any gain provided the feedback sensor is ideal (i.
  For the open loop control system of Figure 2.
6, assume the following: Uk ¼ K p xk  digital control: plant transfer function: parameters sample period a)  Hp ðsÞ ¼ YðzÞ=UðzÞ ¼  Ka s þ s0  Kp ¼ 10 Ka ¼ 50 s0 ¼ 2.
  Fs ¼ 20 kHz Fc ¼ 3:5 kHz  YðzÞ XðzÞ  b)  Is the closed loop control system stable?  c)  If the system is stable, find the unit step response.
  For the closed loop feedback control system of Figure 2.
  What affect does the sample period have on the accuracy of the discrete time model of a digital control system performance analysis?  8.
 Although a relatively simple thermally activated switch can be used to switch power on to the motor, for the present problem assume that the cooling fan is to be regulated by the engine control microprocessor.
  For the example idle speed control system of this chapter, show that derive Eqn 47 using Eqns 41 and 46.
 The engine control is in closed loop.
  A discrete time engine control is operating in a closed loop limit cycle mode of operation at a steady speed and load.
 20  lo ðk þ 20Þ ¼ lo ðkÞ lo ðkÞ ¼ lo ðtk Þ tk ¼ kth sample  where  Sketch the waveform for the integral like term of the limit cycle control I(k) assuming I(0) ¼ 0.
  Explain how the I(k) term in the equation for fuel injector pulse duration (IF(k)) for the limit cycle fuel control is analogous to the integral term in a PID control law.
  Explain how the I(k) term in the equation for fuel injector pulse duration (IF(k)) for the limit cycle fuel control is analogous to the integral term in a PID control law.
  An engine incorporates a MAF sensor (as explained in Chapter 6) in a discrete time control system.
  Given an engine having a discrete time idle speed control system as depicted in Fig.
  For the example VVP discrete time control system shown in Figure 7.
10, complete the derivation of the closed loop control transfer function Hcl(z) of Eqn 51.
  An engine is equipped with a discrete time engine control having knock limited spark control.
  An engine is equipped with a discrete time engine control having knock limited spark control.
 Assume that knock sensors as described in Chapter 6 are incorporated, sketch a complete block diagram for this type of ignition timing control and explain in detail the operation of your configuration.
 There it was shown that, during the dwell period, the coil current increases from 0 exponentially, asymptotically approaching a saturation current Is where Is ¼ Vs/(Rc + Ron) where Rc is the coil resistance and Ron is the transistor emitter to collector resistance when the base current required to drive the transistor into saturation (see Chapter 3) is supplied by the engine control.
 The dwell period is initiated by the engine control based upon measurement of crankshaft angular position.
 For a PID control system in which the desired speed is denoted Vd: HCL ðsÞ ¼  VðsÞ Vd ðsÞ  Kp ¼ 10 KI ¼ 50 KD ¼ 25 b)  Is the closed loop system stable for these control gains?  4.
 For a PID control system in which the desired speed is denoted Vd: HCL ðsÞ ¼  VðsÞ Vd ðsÞ  Kp ¼ 10 KI ¼ 50 KD ¼ 25 b)  Is the closed loop system stable for these control gains?  4.
  For the digital speed control system depicted in the block diagram of Figure 8.
  For the vacuum operated cruise control throttle actuator of Figure 8.
 Find the throttle angle vs control signal duty cycle dp.
  For a vehicle with a digital advanced cruise control (i.
 Show all components of the controller and assume that any required D/A conversion is via zero order hold.
  b)  Explain how electronically controlled strut damping affects the dynamic response of ap(t).
21, are employed in the engine control system.
  A vehicle is travelling along a straight, level road in cruise control mode.
 The cruise control is a digital system incorporating a vehicle speed sensor (VSS) as shown in Figure 8.
 The digital control system of a 4-cylinder engine is equipped with a misfire detection system based upon the nonuniformity index method of the present chapter.
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   
  A Accelerometer, 441 based airbag system, 565f Accumulator, 136 eight bits in, 137 Accumulator register, 136 Active region, 93 Actuation time interval, 397 Actuators, 2 analog (continuous time) throttle, 397 closed-loop control system model, 24 cruise control system, 382e384, 387 duty-cycle-controlled throttle, 399 exemplary solenoid operated, 399 exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 204e206, 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 fuel injectors (FI), 398 manifold-vacuum-operated, 398f solenoid operated, 399 stepper motor, 397 vacuum-operated, 403e406 vacuum-operated throttle, 398, 398f See also Automotive engine control actuators See also Throttle actuator A/D converter, 107 switching operation, 108e109  Address bus, 132 Address offset, 143 Adiabatic gas law, 443 Adiabatic process, 189 Airbag electronics, 562e563 acceleration-sensitive switch, 565 accelerometer-based, 565, 565f deployment system, 564f deployment times, 563t Airflow rate sensor, 236e242 Air/fuel ratio on engine performance, 202e203 Air suspension system, 443 Aliasing errors, 60 Ambient air pressure (AAP), 319 Ambient air temperature (AAT), 319 Analog (continuous time) throttle actuator, 397 Analog controller transfer function, 71 Analog corner frequency, 60 Analog filtering/signal processing, 100 Analog multiplexing system, 466f Analog-to-digital converter (A/D), 58 AND gate, 115e117 Anode, 83 Antilock brake system (ABS), 410e420 Arithmetic and logic unit (ALU), 140  589  Artificial intelligence (AI), 555e556 See also Expert systems in automotive diagnostics Assembler program, 149e150 Assembly language, 148e150, 149t Automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f Automotive diagnostics CAN network, 523 of catalytic converter, 526 computer-based instrumentation, 519 diagnostic fault codes, 529e543 electronic control system, 522e524 electronic subsystems (ECUs), 523 expert systems, 555e561 of fuel injector, 526 heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 533e539, 537f model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 off-board diagnostics, 522e524 onboard diagnostics, 522, 525e526 onboard digital systems, 521e522 portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524  590  Index  Automotive diagnostics (Continued )  service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 at service facility, 526 Automotive engine control actuators, 234e265, 279e288 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR), 286e288, 287f fuel injection system, 284e286 ignition system, 304e307 stepper motors, 304 variable valve timing, 288e292 Automotive engine control sensors, 234e265, 319 airflow rate, 236e242 engine angular speed, 256e257 engine crankshaft angular position, 245e247 exemplary manifold pressure sensor configuration, 243f exhaust gas oxygen (EGO), 270e274 for feedback control, 270e276 Hall-effect position, 259e262, 260f inductive variable reluctance angular position, 255 knock, 276e279 lambda, 270 magnetic reluctance position, 247e259 mass airflow (MAF), 313e314 optical crankshaft position, 263e265 oxygen sensor improvements, 274e276 pressure measurements, 242e245 shielded-field, 262 strain gauge MAP, 242e245, 244f switching time for EGO sensor, 272e274 temperature, 268 throttle angle, 265e268  timing for ignition and fuel delivery, 258e259 typical coolant, 268e270 variable reluctance, 254 variables measured, 236 zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 Automotive instrumentation early, 460 electronic, 460e461 modern, 460e463  B Bandstop filter, 46 Band theory of electrons, 81e82 Base bias current, 92e93 Baseeemitter diode, 91 Binary digital circuits, 111 Binary number system, 113 decimal equivalent of, 113 decimal equivalent of N8, 113 M-digit octal number, 113 Binary-valued voltage, 398 Bipolar transistors, 96 operating characteristics for, 90e91 Birefringent material, 478 4-bit-adder circuit, 118f 8-bit microcomputer, 135e136 8-bit registers, 136 Boltzman’s constant, 44, 84 Boron, 80 Bottom dead center (BDC), 189, 288 Brake mep (bmep), 197e198 Brake power, 197 Brake-specific CO concentration, 202 Brake-specific fuel consumption (BSFC), 198 Brake-specific HC concentration, 202 Brake-specific NOx concentration, 203, 211e212 Brake torque, 193, 197 Branching, 138 Branch instruction, 143 Bridge circuit, 238f  Brushless DC motor, 301e304, 302f, 371 Buffer, 147 Buses, 132e133 Butterworth analog prototype, 60 Butterworth filter, 46e47 magnitude and phase of third-order, 47, 47f Butterworth low-pass filter, 47 Byte, 132  C CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 180e181 Calcite, 478 Calibration of engine, 201 Camber angle, 446 Camshaft, 190f, 191 Camshaft position sensor (CPS), 210 Camshaft position sensor for determining start of each engine cycle (CS POS/ RPM), 319 CAN network, 504e507, 523 Cartesian coordinate system, 381 Caster angle, 446 Cathode, 83 Cauer filter, 48 Central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 Characteristics curves, 90e91, See also transistor Chassis dynamometer, 180e181, 180f Chebyshev filter, 48 Clearance volume, 191 Clock, 134e135 Closed-loop control system, 21e27, 171 characteristic equation of, 29 with continuous time models, 71 discrete time, 72f, 77f EGO sensor, 214e215 EGR control system, 336e337 of emissions and fuel economy under various driving conditions, 358  Index faults, 535e536 fuel-control system, 211, 213e215, 323e327 of ignition timing, 347e353 microcomputer in, 171 stability of, 28 Closed-loop indicator (CLI), 536e539 Closed-loop limit-cycle control, 34e35 Closed-loop transfer function, 69, 71 Combinatorial logic circuits, 119 Common emitter forward current gain, 91e92 Compiler, 148 Complementary-metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS), 98 Complex frequency transfer function, 45 Compression ratio, 191 Computer-based instrumentation, 462, 462f advantages, 469e470 analog inputs, 463e464 automotive diagnostics, 519 CAN communication system, 504e507 coolant temperature measurement, 497e498 display devices, 470e474 (See also Display devices in automotive instrumentation) flexibility aspects, 469 fuel gauge system, 470 fuel quantity measurement, 491e496 GPS navigation system, 511e519 high-speed digital communications (CAN), 502e507 input and output signal conversion, 463e469, 464f inputs, 463 multiplexing, 465e468 multirate sampling, 468e469 MUX function, 465e468 N analog sensors, 465e466 oil pressure measurement, 498e500  powertrain control system, 463 switches, 463 telematics, 510e511 trip information system, 507e509 vehicle speed measurement, 500e502 vehicle status sensors, 463 Condition code (CC) register, 136e138, 137f Conduction band, 82 Conductivity of pure semiconductor, 80 Conductivity of material, 81 Conflict set in AI, 559 Continuous time voltage variable, 107 Control bus, 132e133 Convolution theorem, 8 Coolant temperature (CT), 319 measurement, 497e498 Cornering forces, 451 CPU registers, 135e140 Crankshaft angle, 193e194, 545e546 angular position and RPM sensor (CPS), 319 angular position and speed, 552, 554 angular speed, 257, 552e553 angular speed sensor, 553f fluctuations in combustion chamber, 195e196 instantaneous angular position, 553, 555 valve-opening period, 223 Critical damping, 389 Cruise control system, 382e399, 387f actuator, 382e384, 387, 399 advanced, 406e409 analog version, 391, 404f configuration, 386f, 387f control performance, 389f digital, 390e394, 390f drag coefficient, 384 dynamic model, 384e385 electronics, 400e409 engine brake torque and speed, 385  591  hardware implementation issues, 394e396 linearized equation of motion, 385 microprocessor-based, 400e401 model for vehicle motion along road, 383 under normal driving conditions, 383 operational transfer function, 386 output electrical signal, 383e384 PI controller, 387e389 powertrain, 383 dynamics, 383 proportional integral (PI) control strategy, 387e389 total external forces acting on vehicle, 383 vehicle dynamic equation of motion, 388 vehicle speed, 382 z-operational transfer function, 392 Cutoff condition, 91 Cylinder displacement, 191  D D/A converter, 110 Damping in suspension system, 421 Damping ratio, 389 Data bus enable (DBE), 139e140 Decimation, 468e469 Demux circuits, 468 Depletion region, 83e84 Diagnostics fault codes, 529e543 actual misfire detection, 548e550 cruise control brake circuit, 541f, 542f fault code P0133, 535e536 flowchart, 533e535, 534f HEGO sensor low voltage fault, 533, 535e536, 537f, 538f, 543 manufacturer-specific codes, 530te533t sample, 530te533t Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) defined, 529 for switch test, 540e542  592  Index  Diagnostics fault codes (Continued )  during vehicle repair/maintenance, 533 wiring harness, 535 Diagnostic scan tool, 523e524, 523f Differential, 366e368, 367f Differential pressure sensor (DPS), 319 Digital circuits, 111e113 Digital control systems, 310e312 components of electronically controlled engine, 313f features, 312e316 Digital corner frequency, 60e61, 63 Digital cruise control system, 390e394, 390f block diagram, 390f closed-loop gain z-transform function, 392 closed-loop transfer function, 392 controller parameters, 390e391 discrete time control system, 392 discrete time z-transform, 391e393 of integral term, 391 inverse z-transform, 393 output z-transform, 393 response to vehicle speed, 393, 393f transfer function for, 390e391 z-operational transfer function for controller, 392 z-transfer function, 391e392 for combination of ZOH and plant, 391 z-transform, 393 Digital data demultiplexer, 469f Digital engine control systems, 318f acceleration/deceleration, 317e319, 358e359 acceleration enrichment, 328 automatic system adjustment, 356  automatic transmission control, 359e366, 363f closed-loop control mode, 323e327, 325f, 358 closed-loop ignition control, 347e353 control modes for fuel control, 316e329 deceleration leaning, 328 differential and traction control, 366e368 electronic ignition control, 343e353 engine crank (starting) mode, 319e320, 357 engine start control scheme, 317 evaporative emissions canister purge, 355 exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) control, 335e337 idle speed control mode, 329e335, 330f integrated, 354e356 knock detection system, 349e352, 350f, 351f open-loop control mode, 317, 322e323, 357e358 secondary air management, 354e355, 355f sensors, 319 spark advance control scheme, 353 system diagnosis, 356 torque converter lock-up control, 366 variable valve timing control, 337e343, 338f warming up of engine, 320e322, 357 Digital filter digital transfer function of, 55e56 sinusoidal frequency response of, 56e57 transfer function of, 57 Digital filter, 55e56 of analog signal, 58f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 57e58  Digital sinusoidal frequency response, 63 Digital subsystem, 55e56 Digital transfer function of digital filter, 55e56 Diode, 55e56, See also p-n diode Discrete time systems theory, 51e52 automotive electronic systems, 51 closed-loop system, 68e71, 70f configuration, 52f control systems, 63e68 example, 72e77 recursive model, 52 sequence of numerical values, 51e52 starred transfer function, 66 Display devices in automotive instrumentation, 470e474 ammeter, 470 electro-optical, 473e474 electro-optical alphanumeric, 470 flat panel (FPD) display, 483e491 fuel quantity gauge, 470 galvanometer, 471 light-emitting diode (LED), 474e476 liquid crystal display (LCD), 476e480 pole pieces and cylindrical core, design of, 471 speedometer, 470 technologies for electronic displays, 474 transmissive LCD, 480 vacuum-fluorescent display (VFD), 480e491 warning lamps, 470 Display random access memory, 489 Doping, 80 Driver electronics, 400 Duty-cycle-controlled throttle actuator, 399 Dwell period, 306 Dynamic braking, 376  Index Dynamic model of vehicle traveling along straight line, 384  E Early model, 90e91 Early voltage, 90e91 Earth-fixed (ECEF) inertial coordinate system, 382 Electric motor (EM), 292e304, 368 Electromagnetism theory, 254 Electronic engine control system, 235f assembly of electronic and electromechanical components, 186 concept of, 184e193 engine ignition system, 230e231 exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 exhaust emission regulations, 178e179 federal government test procedures, 180e184 fuel control system, 209e219 fuel economy, 179e180 generic, 186f idle speed control, 224e229 inputs to controller, 187 intake system with throttle plate, 185f motivation for, 178 output from controller, 188e193 performance analysis of sensors, 186 terms used for engine’s performance, 193e206 Electronic fuel control system, 209e219 catalytic converter, 211 closed-loop control mode, 211, 213e219 components, 209e210 control sequence, 212 exhaust gas oxygen concentration, 214e215 frequency and deviation of fuel controller, 217e219 open-loop control mode, 211, 213 working of, 210e211  Electronic instrumentation, 460e461 display device, 460e461 operation transfer function, 461e462 sensor, 460e462 signal processing, 460e461 Electronics digital circuits, 111e113 diodes, 83e85 feedback techniques, 101e103 field-effect transistor (FET), 96e99 integrated circuit (IC), 99e100, 124 logic circuits, 114e119 microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 operational amplifier (op amp), 100 phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106 rectifier circuit, 85e99 sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 semiconductor devices, 80e85 summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 synchronous counter, 120e124 transistors, 87e96 Electronic steering system, 446e449 Electronic suspension system, 420e446, 421f Electron ignition control, 343e353 closed-loop timing, 347e353 coil driver circuits, 344f 4-cylinder engine, 344f dwell period, 345e346 optimum ignition timing, 345 optimum spark timing, 345 “spark advance” (SA), 345 timing inputs, 345 total spark advance, 346e347 Electro-optical alphanumeric display devices, 470 Engine angular speed sensor, 256e257 Engine coolant sensor (ECS), 210 Engine cycle time, 325  593  Engine mapping, 201e202 Engine position sensor (EPS), 210 English units, 37 Enhancement mode, 97 of FET circuit, 97 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 522 Equivalence ratio, 203 Exemplary solenoid operated actuator, 399 Exhaust catalytic converters, 206e209 oxidizing catalytic converter, 206e207 three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 Exhaust equivalence ratio, 325 Exhaust gas oxygen sensor (EGO), 210, 270e274 desirable characteristics, 272 switching time for, 272e274 voltage, 326 Exhaust gas recirculation actuator (EGR), 210, 286e288, 287f, 335e337 and engine performance, 204e206 Exhaust port system, 189 Expert system, 524e525 in automotive diagnostics, 555e561 artificial intelligence (AI), 555 controlling mechanism of, 559 hypothetical, 556 inference engine, 556 knowledge base, 556 principles involved, 558 rule base, 558, 560f stages of knowledge acquisition, 557f tools for mainframes, 558t  F Fault-code, 522 Fault indication lamp (FIL), 525 Federal test procedures for engine control, 180e184 CAFE (corporate average fuel economy), 181 cost incentives, 184 driving schedules, 182f  594  Index  Federal test procedures for engine control (Continued )  emission and MPG requirements, 183t fuel economy requirements, 181e183 meeting government regulations, 183e184 regulation on nonmethane hydrocarbon (NMHC), 181 standards for vehicle half-life, 183, 183t use of digital electronic control, 184 Feedback techniques, 101e103 using microcomputer, 171e173, 172f Ferromagnetic material domains, 249 Fetched instruction, 142 Field-effect transistors (FET), 96e99, 109 amplifier, 98f analysis procedure for, 98 circuit schematic symbols, 97, 97f electrodes, 97 input impedance for, 98e99 n-channel or p-channel, 96e97 “transconductance” for, 99 Filter design technique, 46e49 Filtering, 45e49 Firmware, 155 First-order time constant for system, 10 Floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 Flywheel, 246 FM demodulator, 554 Forward bias, 84 Forward-biased diode, 84 Forward common emitter current gain at zero bias, 90e91 valve timing and lift, 288 Four-wheel steering (4WS), 449e457 Free electrons, 82, See also n-type semiconductor Frequency mixing, 87 Friction mep (fmep), 197e198 Fuel consumption, 198e200  Fuel injection system, 284e286 Fuel injectors (FI), 209, 284e286 actuator, 398 defined, 284 nozzle geometry, 284 signal, 284e286 Fuel rail, 284 Full-adder circuits, 118 Full hybrid electric vehicle, 368  G Galvanometer, 471, 471f dynamic equation of motion, 472 electrical input to, 472e473 magnetic field configuration, 472f operational transfer function, 473 performance issues, 473 Geometric dilution of position (GDOP), 517, 519, See also GPS Glass cockpit, 483 GPS, 511e519 Grounded emitter output characteristics, 91f  H Half-adder circuit, 118 Half-wave rectifier circuit, 85, 86f Hall effect, 260e262 position sensor, 259e262, 260f Handling in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Hardware issues in control system, 394e396 computed discrete time control signal, 394 gate for digital counters, 396 light detector, 394e395 magnetic speed sensor, 394e395 speed measurement system, 394, 395f, 396f Hardware multiply circuit, 169 Heated exhaust gas oxygen concentration sensor (HEGO) sensor, 319, 533e539, 537f High-voltage bus (HVB), 369e370 Holes, 82, See also p-types semiconductor  Hot wire anemometer, 237e238 Hybrid electric vehicle (HEV), 368e380 Hydraulic lock conditions, 290 Hydrocarbons, 178e179  I IC-engine-powered cars, 368 Ideal engine control, 314 Ideal sampled signal, 60 Ignition systems (IGN), 209, 304e307 Impulse response, 8 Indicated mean-effective pressure (mep), 197e198 Indicated power, 196 Indicated torque, 193, 196 of M cylinder engine, 545 Indicator diagram for actual engine, 192 for four-stroke engine, 191, 192f Inductance, 281 Induction motor, 372 for hybrid vehicle, 372 Inference engine, 556 Infinite impulse response (IIR), 56 Inlet air temperature (IAT), 319 Instantaneous net torque at wheels, 544 Instrument panel (IP), 462e463 Instrumentation, 35e39, 459e460 accuracy, 37 calibration, 37 computer-based, 462, 462f dynamic response of, 38e39 errors in measurement, 37 precision, 37 reliability of, 39 standard magnitudes and, 37 Insulator, 80 Intake system, 314 Integrated circuits (IC), 99e100, 124 CPU, 129e130 Internal combustion engine (ICE), 368 engine misfire detection, 548e550 criterion for, 550  Index identifying by isolating cylinder, 550e551 “signature” nonuniformity index, 550 engine overall efficiency, 200 four-stroke engine, 192f four-stroke IC engine, 189, 191, 193, 288 IC engine cylinder and cam actuation mechanism, 190f Interpolation, 321 Interrupt, 163 Interstate freeway system, 2 Ionospheric index of refraction, 517  J Jacobi elliptic function, 48 JK flipeflop, 119e120 Jump instruction, 144 Jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 Junction barrier potential, 83e84  K Kalman filter gain, 516 Knock sensor, 276e279 Knocking, 348 Knowledge base, 556 Knowledge engineer, 556  L Lambda sensor, 270 Laplace transforms of differential equation, 6 inverse, 8, 59 Lean mixture of air/fuel, 203 Limit-cycle controller, 171 Linear continuous time system theory, 5e15 Linear mapping transformation, 61e62 Linear region, 93, See also Transistor Linear time-invariant continuous time system, 52 Loading errors, 37e38 Load line, 93 Logical shift, 150e151 Logic circuits, 114e119, 116f combination of, 117e119  AND gate, 115e117 JK flipeflop, 119e120 with memory (sequential), 119e120, 120f NOT gate, 114 OR gate, 117 reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Loop gain, 31e32 Lorentz force, 261 Low-pass filter, 45, 102f, 237, 465, 554 ideal, 60 instantaneous phase difference, 106 Low-voltage bus (LVB), 376  M Magnetic field intensity vector, 248 Magnetic field theory, 306e307, 472 Magnetic flux density vector, 248 Magnetic reluctance position sensor, 247e259 Magnetization, 250 Magneto-rheological fluid (MR), 442e443 Magnetostriction, 276e277 Main program loop, 175 Majority carriers, 82, See also p-n junction Manifold pressure port, 398 Manifold pressure sensor (MAP), 319 Manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f Mass airflow (MAF) sensor, 209, 238f, 313e314, 319 MATLAB function, 48, 60 M-bit binary number, 113, 464 Mean best torque, 347 Mean-effective pressure (mep), 197 Mean squared error (MSE), 322 Measurement, 36 errors in, 37 systems, 39e45 Mechanical crash sensor, 564 Memory, 155e156  595  Memory internal timing, 134e135 Memory-mapped I/O, 147 Metal-oxide semiconductor (MOS), 98 Microcomputers accumulator register, 136 addressing peripherals, 135 analog-to-digital A/D converter, 159e161 architecture, 138e140 in automotive systems, 164e166, 462 based engine control system, 131e132 block diagram, 129f branching, 138 branch instruction, 143 buffer, 147 bus timing signals, 135 central processing unit (CPU), 129e130, 154e155 registers, 135e140 condition code (CC) register, 136e138 in control systems, 170e176 in digital electronic systems, 168e170 digital-to-analog converter, 156e159 digital vs analog computers, 128e129 floating point operations (FLOPS), 130 hardware, 154e164 initializing, system, 141 instrumentation applications of, 166e170 I/O parallel interface, 156 jump instruction, 144 jump-to-subroutine instruction, 144e147 vs mainframe computers, 130 memory, 130, 155e156 memory internal timing, 134e135 memory-mapped I/O, 147 multivariable and multiple task systems, 175e176 operations, 132e135 operation codes, 141  596  Index  Microcomputers (Continued )  N  parts, 129e130 precision and accuracy of calculations, 130 program, 130e131 program counter, 142 programming languages, 148e154 reading instructions, 140e147 read/write (R/W), 133e134, 134f table lookup using, 173e175 tasks, 131e132 time for decoding, 134e135 Microcontroller, 400 Microinstructions, 125e126 Microprocessor (MPU), 124e126 Mild hybrids, 368 Minority carriers, 82, See also p-n injunction Misfire, 525 MKS system (meter, kilogram, sec), 37 Mnemonics, 148e149, 149t Model-based misfire detection system, 544e555 Model-based sensor failure detection, 526e529 of calibration change, 526 electrical systema, 528 independent check on MAF calibration, 526 intake air density, 527 intake air temperature sensor, 527 MAF sensor calibration, 527e528 missing pulses, 528 volumetric efficiency of engine, 527 Multiple-bit-adder circuit, 118, 118f Multiplexing, 465e468 analog system, 466f digital, 467f time-domain (TDM), 465 Multiplication of bit numbers, 118 Multirate sampling, 468e469  N-dimensional vector x, 18 Net energy/cycle, 193 Nickelemetal hydride (NiMH), 376 Nonrecursive filter, 56 Normalized analog corner frequency, 61 NOT gate, 114 NPN transistor circuit, 112, 112f n-type semiconductor, 80  O Occupant protection system, 562e567 Octal number system, 113 Off-board diagnostics, 522, 561 Off condition, 91 Onboard diagnostics, 525e526, 543e544 limitation, 529 On-Board Diagnostics II (OBD II), 522, 543e544 Op-code decoder, 141 Open-loop control, 20e21 digital engine control systems, 317, 322e323, 357, 358 electronic fuel control system, 211, 213 open-loop discrete time control system, 65f Operational amplifiers (op amp), 100 closed-loop gain, 102e103 feedback techniques in, 101e103 inputs and outputs, 100, 100f inverting and non-inverting inputs, 101e102 low-pass filter, 102f steady-state sinusoidal frequency response, 103 Optical crankshaft position sensor, 263e265 Optoelectronics, 473e474 OR gate, 117  P Parallel hybrid vehicle, 369e370 Parallel load serial down-count binary counter, 401 Passband, 45  PD controller, 66e67 Phase, defined, 288 Phase-locked loop (PLL), 104e106, 554 Phosphor, 480e481 PID control law, 71 PID controller, 24, 30, 33, 172e173 Piezoresistivity, 243 Pitch, 381 Planetary gears, 360, 362 Plasma frequency, 517e518 pen diode, 85 pen junction, 83e84 Pneumatic piston arrangement, 398 Pneumatic spring, 443 Polling, 162e163 Portable scan diagnostic tool (PSDT), 523e524 Potentiometer, 265 Power, 196e198 Power spectral density, 43 Powertrain digital data line (PDDL), 463 Printed circuit board, 99, 154e155 Process noise, 43 Program counter, 141e142 Programming languages ANDed with signal B in SEAT, 153 assembly language, 148e150, 149t AND function, 152 logic functions, 150 masking, 153 shift operation, 150e151 use of subroutine, 153e154 Prony brake, 197 Proportional control, 33 Proportional integral (PI) control law, continuous time, 391 p-type semiconductor, 80, 82 Pulse transfer function, 66  Q Quarter car model (QCM), 432 suspension configuration, 433f  R Random access display, 481e482 Random access memory (RAM), 131, 156, 400  Index Random sensor errors, 42e44 Rare earth elements, 371 Reactor, 360e361 Reading instructions, 140e147 Read-only memory (ROM), 131, 155e156, 400 Real-time computing system, 164 Reciprocating torque, 545 associated with mth cylinder, 546 Reconstruction filter, 166e168 Rectifier circuit, 85e99 alternating current voltage, 85e86 capacitor, 86 carrier frequency of informationcarrying signal, 87 input voltage, 86 output voltage, 86, 86f Recursive filter equation, 62e63 Reference input, 21 Refraction index ionosphere, 517 path length change due to, 518 troposphere, 518 Regenerative braking, 372 Registers, 121e122, 136 Reluctance, 254 Remanent magnetization, 250 Reseteset (ReS) flipeflop, 119 Residue theorem, 8 Resistivity of material, 81 Return-from-subroutine (RTS) instruction, 146e147, 146f Reverse bias, 84 Reverse-biased diode, 84 Reverse magnetostriction, 277 Rich mixture of air/fuel, 203 Ride in driver/passenger standpoint, 421 Ring gear, 362 Robustness of control-system stability, 31e33 Roll, 381, See also Suspension system Root-locus techniques, 29e31 Rotary potentiometer, 261, 267 Rotor currents, 298e299, See also Electric motor  S Sample and hold circuit, 108 Sample and zero-order hold circuit, 106e111 Sampled data system, 51e52 Sampling, 162 Sampling frequency, 61 Sampling theorem, 60 Satellite elevation above Earth, 518 Saturation condition, 93 Secondary air management, 207, 354e355, 355f Semiconductor materials, 80 band theory of electrons, 81e82 concentrations under thermal equilibrium after doping, 82 conductivity of pure, 80 doping, 82 electrical conductivity, 80, 81f electric field intensity, 80e81, 83 energy levels, 82 mean velocities, 83 Sensors, 2, 40e42 noise amplitude of, 44 power spectral density, 43 random errors, 42e44 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response for, 43 valve-positioning, 223e224 See also Automotive engine control sensors Sequential logic circuit, 119e120 Serial operation, 138 Series hybrid vehicle (SHV), 369 Service bay diagnostic system, 524e525 reading of stored fault code, 524 Shielded-field sensor, 262 Shift register, 122e124 Signal processing, 45 in contemporary vehicle instrumentation, 462 electronic instrumentation, 460e461 Signal-processing filter passband, 48 SIMULINK block, 327 Single cylinder of IC engine, 189, 190f  597  Sinusoidal frequency response, 56e63 Sliding mode observer (SMO), 415 Slip, defined, 299e300 Solenoid operated actuator, 399 Solid-state diode, 83 Spark timing on engine performance, 203e204 Speed-density method, 221e223, See also Mass airflow measurements Sprung mass, 420e421 Stack pointer (SP), 145e146, 146f Stacks, 145e146 Starred transform, 59 closed-loop system, 68e70 State variables, 18 Steady-state operating motor speed, 374 Stepper motor, 304, 329 displacement, 397 type actuator, 397 Stoichiometric mass flow rate for fuel, 224 Stoichiometric mixture, 203 Stopband, 45 Strain gauge manifold pressure sensor sensor, 242e245, 244f Strokes of engine, 189 Summing mode op amp circuit, 103e111 Sun gear, 362 Supercharged engine, 219 Surface-mounted ICs, 154e155 Suspension system Synchronous counter, 120e124 circuit, 121f registers, 121e122 shift register, 122e124 System analog (continuous time), 5 block diagram representation of, 3e5 closed-loop control, 21e27 concept, 2e5 defined, 2  598  Index  System (Continued )  electronic, 2, 3f first order, 9e11 instrumentation, 35e39 open-loop control, 20e21 second-order, 11e15 stability of, 28e33 state variable formulation of models, 17e19 steady-state sinusoidal frequency response of, 16e17 Systematic error, 37e39  T Temperature compensating resistance, 240 Temperature sensor, 268 Thermistor, 497 Three-way catalyst (TWC), 207e209 average air/fuel ratio to tolerances, 208 chemical design, 207 conversion efficiency, 207e208, 209f operation, 208 Throttle actuator, 386, 396e399 duty-cycle-controlled, 399 manifold-vacuum-operated actuator, 398f stepper motor displacement, 397 stepper motor-type actuator, 397 throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle angle sensor, 265e268 Throttle plate angular displacement, 397 Throttle position sensor (TPS), 209, 319 Time-domain multiplexing (TDM), 465 Tire slip angles, 450e451 Tire-slip controller, 420 Top dead center (TDC), 189, 288 Torque, 193e196 Torque converter, 360, 360f lock-up, 366 control, 366 Torque converter locking clutch (TCC), 366  Traction control devices, 366e368 Transconductance, 99 of FET, 99 Transfer function, 6, 41e42, 47 digital, 62 digital filter, 57 of galvanometer display, 493e494 models characterized by, 22 poles of, 7 using MATLAB, 48 of zero-order hold, 59 Transflexive LCD structure, 480 Transistors, 87e96 a-c collector current, 95 applications, 93 base current, 95 baseeemitter junction, 89e90 “bipolar” or “field effect” categories, 87e88 circuit voltage gain, 95e96 collectorebase diode, 93 collectorebase junction, 88e89 conventional current flow, 88 field-effect (FET), 96e99 frequency dependence of amplifier gain, 96 linear amplification, 93 NPN transistor, 88 operating characteristics, 90e91 schematic symbols, 88f small signal linear incremental transistor model, 94e95 z-transfer function, 391 z-transform function, 392 Transistor voltage/current characteristics, 91e92, 91f Transport delay, 217 Tropospheric index of refraction, 518 Truth table, 114 Twisted nematic liquid crystal, 476e480 Two-phase induction motor, torque and instantaneous power of, 298 Two’s complement notation, 138  U Ultra-caps, 376 Unsprung mass, 11, 420e421  V Vacuum-operated actuator, 403e406 Vacuum-operated throttle actuator, 398, 398f Valence band, 82 Valve overlap, 223 Valve-positioning sensor, 223e224 Valve timing, 191 Variable reluctance sensor, 254 Variable valve phasing, 191 mechanism model, 290e292 Variable valve timing, 288e292 alternate cam phasing mechanism, 289f camshaft movements, 289 and gas dynamics of cylinder, 288 mechanism for valve phasing, 289f optimal cam timing, 288 spool valve actuation, 290 Vectored interrupt, 163e164 Vehicle motion controls axes of control, 381 representative cruise control system, 382e399 Vehicle speed, 382 Very large scale integrated circuits (VLSI), 184 Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO), 105 capture range, 105 Volume flow rate, 221, 224  W Wheatstone bridge, 244 Word, 132  Y Yaw, 381  Index Z Zero-crossing detector (ZCD), 257, 555 Zero-order hold (ZOH), 58e59, 64, 72, 135 approximate model for, 64e65  circuit, 110e111, 110f, 465 ideal, 64e65, 111 output, 65 Zirconium dioxide (ZrO2) sensor, 270e271 z-transform, 53, 73e74  599  digital filter, 55e56 discrete time control systems, 66e67 elementary properties of, 53 inverse, 54, 56, 58 starred transform of, 59e60  This page intentionally left blank   

