THE THREE MUSKETEERS 
Preface 
In which it is established that, despite their names ending in -os and 
is, the heroes of the story we shall have the honor of telling our readers are 
in no way mythological. 
About a year ago, while doing research in the Royal Library for my 
history of Louis XIV,1 I chanced upon the Memoirs of Monsieur 
d'Artagnan, printed—like most works of that period, when authors were 
anxious to tell the truth without going for a more or less long turn in the 
Bastille—in Amsterdam, by Pierre Rouge.2 The title appealed to me: I took 
the book home, with the librarian's permission, of course, and devoured it. 
I have no intention of making an analysis of this curious work here, 
and will content myself with recommending it to those of my readers who 
appreciate period pieces. They will find portraits in it penciled with a 
masterly hand, and though these sketches are most often drawn on 
barracks doors and the walls of taverns, they will nonetheless recognize 
the images of Louis XIII, Anne d'Autriche, Richelieu, Mazarin, and most of 
the courtiers of the time, of as good a likeness as in M. Anquetil's history.3 
But, as we know, what strikes the capricious mind of the poet is not 
always what impresses the mass of readers. Now, while we admire, as 
others no doubt will, the details we have pointed out, the thing that 
concerned us most was something to which quite certainly no one before 
us has paid the least attention. 
D'Artagnan tells us that at his first visit to M. de Tréville,4 the captain 
of the king's musketeers, he met in his antechamber three young men 
serving in the illustrious corps into which he was requesting the honor of 
being received, and who were named Athos, Porthos, and Aramis. 
We admit that these three strange names struck us, and it immediately 
occurred to us that they were merely pseudonyms by means of which 
d'Artagnan had disguised possibly illustrious names, if the bearers of these 
borrowed names had not chosen them for themselves on the day when, 
out of caprice, discontent, or lack of fortune, they had donned the simple 
tabard of a musketeer. 
1 
Preface  
From then on we could not rest until we had found, in works of that 
time, some trace of these extraordinary names which had so strongly 
aroused our curiosity. 
The mere catalogue of the books we read through in order to reach 
that simple goal would fill a whole installment,5 which might well be 
highly instructive, but would surely not be very amusing for our readers. 
We will content ourselves, therefore, with telling them that at the moment 
when, discouraged by so many fruitless investigations, we were about to 
abandon our research, we finally found, with the guidance of our 
illustrious and learned friend Paulin Paris,6 a folio manuscript, shelf
marked number 4772 or 4773, we no longer remember very well, with the 
title: 
Memoirs of M. le comte de La Fère,7 concerning some events that 
transpired in France towards the end of the reign of King Louis XIII and 
the beginning of the reign of King Louis XIV. 
One may imagine how great our joy was when, in leafing through this 
manuscript, our last hope, we found on the twentieth page the name of 
Athos, on the twenty-seventh page the name of Porthos, and on the thirty
first the name of Aramis. 
The discovery of a completely unknown manuscript, in a period when 
historical science has been raised to such a high level, seemed almost 
miraculous to us. Thus we hastened to request permission to have it 
printed, with the aim of presenting ourselves to the Academy of 
Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres with other men's baggage, if we should not 
succeed, as is highly likely, in entering the French Academy8 with our own. 
This permission, we must say, was graciously granted; which fact we 
record here in order to give a public refutation to those malicious persons 
who claim that we are living under a government which is not especially 
well disposed towards men of letters. 
Today we offer our readers the first part of this precious manuscript, 
giving it a more suitable title, with the commitment that if, as we have no 
doubt, this first part obtains the success it merits, we will shortly publish 
the second. 
In the meantime, as a godfather is a second father, we invite the reader 
to lay the blame on us, and not on the comte de La Fère, for his pleasure or 
his boredom. 
That said, let us go on to our story. 
2 
THE THREE MUSKETEERS 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr. 
On the first Monday of the month of April 1625, the village of Meung, 
where the author of the Romance of the Rose was born,9 seemed to be in 
as total an upheaval as if the Huguenots had come to make a second La 
Rochelle.10 Many of the townsmen, seeing women fleeing along the main 
street, hearing children crying on the doorsills, hastened to put on their 
breastplates and, backing up their somewhat uncertain countenances with 
a musket or a partisan, headed for the Jolly Miller Inn, before which jostled 
a compact group, noisy, full of curiosity, and growing every minute. 
At that time panics were frequent, and few days passed without one 
town or another recording some such event in its archives. There were 
lords who fought among themselves; there was the king who made war on 
the cardinal; there was the Spaniard who made war on the king.11 Then, 
besides these hidden or public, secret or open wars, there were also the 
robbers, the beggars, the Huguenots, the wolves, and the lackeys, who 
made war on everybody. The townsfolk always took up arms against the 
robbers, against the wolves, against the lackeys— often against the lords 
and the Huguenots—and sometimes against the king—but never against 
the cardinal or the Spaniard. The result of this acquired habit thus was 
that, on the first Monday of the month of April 1625, the townsmen, 
hearing noise, and seeing neither the yellow-and-red standard, nor the 
livery of the duc de Richelieu, rushed for the Jolly Miller Inn. 
Arrived there, each of them could see and identify the cause of the stir. 
A young man . . . —let us draw his portrait with a single stroke of the 
pen: picture to yourself Don Quixote at eighteen, Don Quixote husked, 
without hauberk and greaves, Don Quixote dressed in a woolen doublet 
whose blue color has been transformed into an elusive nuance of wine lees 
and celestial azure. A long, brown face; prominent cheekbones, a token of 
shrewdness; enormously developed jaw muscles, an infallible sign by 
which to recognize a Gascon, even without a beret, and our young man 
was wearing a beret, decorated with a sort of feather; eyes open and 
intelligent; nose hooked but finely drawn; too tall for an adolescent, too 
small for a grown man, and whom an inexperienced eye would have taken 
3 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr.  
for a farmer's son on a journey, were it not for his long sword, hung from a 
leather baldric, which slapped against its owner's calves when he was on 
foot, and against the bristling hide of his mount when he was on 
horseback. 
For our young man had a mount, and this mount was even so 
remarkable that it was remarked: it was a Béarnais nag, twelve or fourteen 
years old, yellow of coat, without a hair in its tail, but not without galls on 
its legs, and which, though it walked with its head lower than its knees, 
rendering the application of a martingale unnecessary, still made its eight 
leagues a day. Unfortunately, the qualities of this horse were so well 
hidden under its strange hide and incongruous bearing that, in a time 
when everyone was a connoisseur of horses, the appearance of the 
abovementioned nag in Meung, which it had entered about a quarter of an 
hour before by the Beaugency gate, caused a sensation the disfavor of 
which reflected back on its rider. 
And this sensation had been all the more painful to the young 
d'Artagnan (as the Don Quixote of this other Rosinante was called), in that 
he was unable to conceal the ridiculous side lent to him, good horseman 
that he was, by such a mount; indeed, he had sighed deeply on accepting 
the gift of it from M. d'Artagnan Sr. He was not unaware that such a beast 
was worth at least twenty livres; but in truth the words that had 
accompanied the gift were beyond price. 
"My son," the Gascon gentleman had said, in that pure Béarnais patois 
of which Henri IV12 had never managed to rid himself, "my son, this horse 
was born in your father's house some thirteen years ago, and has remained 
there ever since, which should bring you to love it. Never sell it, let it die 
peacefully and honorably of old age, and if you go on campaign with it, 
handle it as you would an old servant. At court," M. d'Artagnan Sr. went 
on, "if you should have the honor of going there, an honor to which, 
moreover, your old nobility entitles you, uphold worthily your gentleman's 
name, which has been borne worthily by your ancestors for more than five 
hundred years. For you and yours—by yours I mean your relations and 
your friends—never bear with anything except from M. le cardinal and the 
king. It is by his courage, understand me well, it is by his courage alone 
that a gentleman makes his way nowadays. He who trembles for a second 
may let the bait escape which, for just that second, fortune held out to 
him. You are young, you must be brave for two reasons: first, because you 
are a Gascon, and second, because you are my son. Do not shrink from 
4 
The Three Musketeers 
opportunities and seek out adventures. I have taught you to handle a 
sword; you have legs of iron, a fist of steel; fight whenever you can; fight all 
the more because duels are forbidden, and therefore it takes twice the 
courage to fight. All I can give you, my son, is fifteen ecus, my horse, and 
the advice you have just heard. Your mother will add the recipe for a 
certain balm, which she got from a Bohemian woman, and which has the 
miraculous virtue of healing every wound that does not attain the heart. 
Take your profit from everything, and live happily and long. I have only 
one more word to add, and it is an example I propose to you—not my own, 
because as for me, I have never appeared at court and only fought as a 
volunteer in the wars of religion;13 I mean to speak of M. de Tréville, who 
was my neighbor once upon a time, and who had the honor while still a 
child of playing with our King Louis XIIIth, God keep him! Sometimes 
their games degenerated into fighting, and in these fights the king was not 
always the stronger. The blows he received gave him much esteem and 
friendship for M. de Tréville. Later M. de Tréville fought against others 
during his first trip to Paris, five times; from the death of the late king to 
the coming of age of the young one, not counting wars and sieges, seven 
times; and from that coming of age till today, maybe a hundred times! And 
so, despite edicts, rulings, and writs, here he is captain of the musketeers, 
that is, head of a legion of Caesars which the king sets great store by, and 
which the cardinal fears, he who does not fear much, as everyone knows. 
What's more, M. de Tréville earns ten thousand ecus a year; so he is a very 
great lord. He began like you. Go to see him with this letter, and rule 
yourself by him, in order to become like him." 
Upon which, M. d'Artagnan Sr. buckled his own sword on his son, 
kissed him tenderly on both cheeks, and gave him his blessing. 
On coming out of the paternal chamber, the young man found his 
mother, who was waiting for him with the famous recipe, a rather frequent 
use of which would be necessitated by the advice we have just reported. 
The farewells on this side were longer and more tender than they had been 
on the other—not that M. d'Artagnan did not love his son, who was his 
only progeny, but M. d'Artagnan was a man and would have regarded it as 
unworthy of a man to let himself give way to his emotion, while Mme 
d'Artagnan was a woman and, what's more, a mother. She wept 
abundantly, and, let it be said in praise of M. d'Artagnan Jr., despite the 
efforts he made to remain firm as a future musketeer should be, nature 
5 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr.  
prevailed, and he shed many tears, only half of which he managed with 
great difficulty to conceal. 
That same day the young man set out, provided with three paternal 
presents, which consisted, as we have said, of fifteen ecus, a horse, and the 
letter to M. de Tréville. The advice, of course, had been thrown in on top of 
it all. 
With such a vade mecum, d'Artagnan turned out to be, morally as well 
as physically, an exact copy of Cervantes's hero, to whom we so happily 
compared him when our duties as historian made it necessary for us to 
draw his portrait. Don Quixote took windmills for giants and sheep for 
armies; d'Artagnan took every smile for an insult and every glance for a 
provocation. As a result of which he kept his fist clenched from Tarbes14 to 
Meung, and all in all brought his hand to the pommel of his sword ten 
times a day; however, the fist never landed on any jaw, and the sword 
never left its scabbard. Not that the sight of the wretched yellow nag did 
not spread many smiles across the faces of passersby; but since above the 
nag clanked a sword of respectable size, and above this sword shone an eye 
more fierce than proud, the passersby restrained their hilarity, or, if 
hilarity won out over prudence, they tried at least to laugh on one side 
only, like antique masques. D'Artagnan thus remained majestic and intact 
in his susceptibility until that unfortunate town of Meung. 
But there, as he was getting off his horse at the gate of the Jolly Miller, 
without anyone, host, waiter, or groom, coming to hold his stirrup at the 
mounting block, d'Artagnan caught sight, through a half-open window on 
the ground floor, of a gentleman of fine proportion and haughty bearing, 
though with a somewhat sullen look, talking with two persons who 
appeared to be listening to him with deference. D'Artagnan quite naturally 
believed, according to his habit, that he was the subject of conversation, 
and he listened in. This time d'Artagnan was only half mistaken: it was a 
question not of him, but of his horse. The gentleman was apparently 
enumerating all its qualities to his listeners, and since, as I have said, the 
listeners appeared to show great deference to the narrator, they burst out 
laughing every moment. Now, since a half smile was enough to awaken the 
young man's irascibility, one can imagine what effect this loud hilarity had 
on him. 
However, d'Artagnan wanted first to take account of the physiognomy 
of the impertinent fellow who was mocking him. He fixed his proud gaze 
on the stranger and made him out to be a man of forty to forty-five, with 
6 
The Three Musketeers 
dark and piercing eyes, pale skin, a strongly accentuated nose, a black and 
perfectly trimmed mustache. He was dressed in a violet doublet and knee 
breeches, with aiguilettes of the same color, without any ornament other 
than the usual slashes through which the shirt appeared. These knee 
breeches and doublet, though new, looked wrinkled, like traveling clothes 
long shut away in a portmanteau. D'Artagnan made all these observations 
with the rapidity of the most meticulous observer, and no doubt from an 
instinctive feeling which told him that this unknown man would have a 
great influence on his life to come. 
Now, since at the moment when d'Artagnan fixed his gaze on the 
gentleman in the violet doublet, the gentleman was making one of his 
most learned and profound demonstrations anent the Béarnais nag, his 
two listeners burst out laughing, and he himself, contrary to his habit, 
visibly allowed a pale smile to stray, if one may put it so, over his face. This 
time there was no more doubt, d'Artagnan had really been insulted. And 
so, filled with that conviction, he pulled his beret down over his eyes, and, 
trying to copy some of the courtly airs he had picked up in Gascony from 
traveling noblemen, stepped forward, one hand on the hilt of his sword 
and the other resting on his hip. Unfortunately, as he advanced, blinded 
more and more by anger, instead of the dignified and haughty speech he 
had prepared to formulate his provocation, he found on the tip of his 
tongue only words of a crude personality, which he accompanied with a 
furious gesture. 
"Hey! Monsieur," he cried, "Monsieur, hiding there behind that 
shutter! Yes, you! Tell me a little of what you're laughing at, and we'll laugh 
together!" 
The gentleman slowly shifted his eyes from the mount to the rider, as if 
it took him some time to understand that such strange reproaches had 
been addressed to him; then, when he could no longer entertain any 
doubt, his eyebrows knitted slightly, and after a fairly long pause, with an 
accent of irony and insolence impossible to describe, he answered 
d'Artagnan: 
"I am not speaking to you, Monsieur." 
"But I am speaking to you!" cried the young man, exasperated by this 
mixture of insolence and good manners, of propriety and disdain. 
The unknown man looked at him an instant longer with his slight 
smile, and, withdrawing from the window, slowly came out of the inn to 
approach within two steps of d'Artagnan and plant himself facing the 
7 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr.  
horse. His calm countenance and mocking physiognomy redoubled the 
hilarity of the men he had been talking with, who for their part remained 
at the window. 
D'Artagnan, seeing him come, drew his sword a foot's length from its 
scabbard. 
"This horse is decidedly, or rather was in its youth, a buttercup," the 
unknown man picked up, continuing the investigations he had begun and 
addressing his listeners at the window, without seeming to notice the 
exasperation of d'Artagnan, who was nevertheless standing between him 
and them. "It is a color well known in botany, but till now extremely rare 
among horses." 
"He laughs at the horse who would not dare laugh at its master!" cried 
the furious emulator of Tréville. 
"I do not laugh often, Monsieur," the unknown man picked up, "as you 
can see yourself from the look of my face; but I nevertheless intend to keep 
the privilege of laughing when it pleases me." 
"And I," cried d'Artagnan, "I do not want anyone to laugh when it 
displeases me!" 
"Indeed, Monsieur?" the unknown man went on, calmer than ever. 
"Well, that's perfectly fair!" And turning on his heel, he was about to go 
back into the inn through the main gate, under which d'Artagnan, on his 
arrival, had noticed an already saddled horse. 
But d'Artagnan was not of a character to let a man go like that who had 
had the insolence to mock him. He drew his sword all the way out of the 
scabbard and set off in pursuit, shouting: 
"Turn, turn then, Mister scoffer, so that I don't strike you from 
behind!" 
"Strike me?!" said the other, swinging round on his heel and looking at 
the young man with as much astonishment as scorn. "Come, come, my 
dear fellow, you're mad!" 
Then, in a low voice, as if talking to himself, he went on: 
"It's too bad. What a find for His Majesty, who is searching everywhere 
for brave men to be recruited into his musketeers!" 
He had barely finished when d'Artagnan lunged at him with such a 
furious thrust that, if he had not made a quick leap backwards, he would 
probably have joked for the last time. The unknown man saw then that 
things had gone beyond raillery, drew his sword, saluted his adversary, and 
put himself gravely on guard. But at the same moment, his two listeners, 
8 
The Three Musketeers 
accompanied by the host, fell upon dArtagnan with great blows of sticks, 
shovels, and tongs. This made so quick and complete a diversion to the 
attack that d'Artagnan's adversary, while the former turned to face this hail 
of blows, sheathed his sword with the same precision, and, from the actor 
he had failed to be, became a spectator of the combat, a role he fulfilled 
with his ordinary impassivity, though muttering to himself: 
"A plague on these Gascons! Put him back on his orange horse and 
send him on his way!" 
"Not before I've killed you, coward!" cried d'Artagnan, still holding up 
the best he could and not yielding one step to his three enemies, who were 
flailing away at him. 
"Another gasconade," murmured the gentleman. "On my honor, these 
Gascons are incorrigible! Keep up the dance, then, since he absolutely 
insists on it. When he gets tired, he'll say he's had enough." 
But the unknown man did not know yet what kind of entity he was 
dealing with: d'Artagnan was not a man ever to cry mercy. The combat 
thus went on for several seconds more; finally d'Artagnan, exhausted, 
dropped his sword, which the blow of a stick broke in two. Another blow, 
which opened up his forehead, brought him down at almost the same 
time, all bloody and nearly unconscious. 
It was at that moment that people came running from all sides to the 
scene of the event. Fearing a scandal, the host, with the help of his waiters, 
carried the wounded man to the kitchen, where he was looked after a little. 
As for the gentleman, he had gone back to take his place at the window 
and looked with a certain impatience at the whole mob, which seemed to 
cause him sharp vexation by staying there. 
"Well, how's that wild man doing?" he asked, turning around at the 
sound of the opening door and addressing the host, who came to inquire 
after his health. 
"Your Excellency is safe and sound?" asked the host. 
"Yes, perfectly safe and sound, my dear innkeeper, and it's I who am 
asking you what's become of our young man." 
"He's better," said the host. "He passed out completely." 
"Really?" said the gentleman. 
"But before passing out, he gathered all his strength to call you out and 
challenge you." 
"Why, then this strapping lad is the devil in person!" cried the 
unknown man. 
9 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr.  
"Oh, no, Your Excellency, he's not the devil," the host picked up, 
wincing with scorn, "for we searched him while he was passed out, and he 
has nothing in his pack but a shirt and nothing in his purse but twelve 
ecus, which didn't keep him from saying as he passed out that if such a 
thing had happened in Paris, you would have repented of it at once, while 
here you'll repent of it later." 
"So," the unknown man said coldly, "he's some prince of the blood in 
disguise." 
"I'm telling you this, sir," the host went on, "so that you'll keep on your 
guard." 
"And he didn't name anyone in his anger?" 
"Yes, he did. He slapped his pocket and said: 'We'll see what M. de 
Tréville will think of this insult to his protégé.' " 
"M. de Tréville?" said the unknown man, turning all attention. "He 
slapped his pocket while pronouncing the name of M. de Tréville? . . . Look 
here, my good host, while your young man was passed out, I'm sure you 
didn't do without looking in that pocket as well. What was in it?" 
"A letter addressed to M. de Tréville, captain of the musketeers." 
"Indeed!" 
"It is as I have the honor of telling you, Your Excellency." 
The host, who was not endowed with great perspicacity, never noticed 
the expression his words had given to the unknown man's physiognomy. 
The latter left the sill of the casement on which he had been leaning, 
propped on his elbow, and knitted a worried man's brows. 
"Devil take it!" he murmured between his teeth. "Could Tréville have 
sent me this Gascon? He's quite young! But a sword stroke is a sword 
stroke, whatever the age of the one who gives it, and one is less wary of a 
boy than of anyone else; a weak obstacle is sometimes enough to thwart a 
grand design." 
And the unknown man fell to thinking for several minutes. 
"Look here, host," he said, "won't you rid me of this frenetic? In all 
conscience, I can't kill him, and yet," he added with a coldly menacing 
expression, "and yet he's a nuisance to me. Where is he?" 
"In my wife's bedroom, being bandaged, on the first floor." 
"His rags and sack are with him? He didn't take off his doublet?" 
"All that, on the contrary, is down in the kitchen. But since he's a 
nuisance to you, this young fool..." 
10 
The Three Musketeers 
"To be sure. He's causing a scandal in your inn that honest people are 
unable to stand. Go to your room, make out my bill, and alert my lackey.” 
"What! Monsieur is leaving us already?" 
"You know very well I am, since I gave you orders to saddle my horse. 
Have they not been obeyed?" 
"They have, and as Your Excellency may have seen, his horse is under 
the main gate, all fitted out for departure." 
"That's good, now do as I just told you." 
"Hah!" the host said to himself, "can he be afraid of the little lad?" 
But an imperative glance from the unknown man brought him up 
short. He bowed humbly and left. 
"The scamp mustn't catch sight of Milady,"1 the stranger went on. "She 
ought to be passing soon; she's even already late. It will decidedly be better 
if I get on my horse and go to meet her ... If only I knew what's in that 
letter to Tréville!" 
And the unknown man, muttering all the while, made his way to the 
kitchen. 
During this time the host, who had no doubt that it was the young 
man's presence that drove the unknown man from his inn, had gone back 
up to his wife's room and found d'Artagnan finally master of his wits. 
Therefore, making him understand that the police might give him a bad 
time for having sought a quarrel with a great lord—for, in the host's 
opinion, the unknown man could only be a great lord—he persuaded him, 
despite his weakness, to get up and continue on his way. D'Artagnan, half
dazed, without his doublet, and his head all swathed in linen, got up then 
and, propelled by the host, began going downstairs; but, arriving in the 
kitchen, the first thing he saw was his provoker, calmly chatting away on 
the footboard of a heavy carriage harnessed to two big Normandy horses. 
His interlocutrice, whose head appeared framed by the carriage door, 
was a woman of twenty or twenty-two. We have already said with what 
rapidity of investigation d'Artagnan could take in a whole physiognomy; he 
thus saw at first glance that the woman was young and beautiful. Now, this 
beauty struck him all the more in that it was perfectly foreign to the 
southern lands which d'Artagnan had inhabited up to then. This was a pale 
and blond person, with long curly hair falling on her shoulders, with large, 
1We know very well that the term "Milady" is used only when followed by the family name. But we 
find it thus in the manuscript, and do not want to take it upon ourselves to change il. [Dumas's 
note] 
11 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr.  
languishing blue eyes, with rosy lips and hands of alabaster. She was 
having a very lively chat with the unknown man. 
"And so, His Eminence orders me ..." said the lady. 
"To return to England this very instant, and to inform him right away if 
the duke15 leaves London." 
"And as for my other instructions?" asked the beautiful traveler. 
"They're contained in this box, which you are to open only on the other 
side of the Channel." 
"Very good. And you, what are you doing?" 
"Me? I'm returning to Paris." 
"Without punishing that insolent little boy?" asked the lady. 
The unknown man was about to respond, but the moment he opened 
his mouth, d'Artagnan, who had heard everything, came leaping out of the 
doorway. 
"It's that insolent little boy who punishes others," he cried, "and I hope 
that this time the one he must punish will not escape him as he did the 
first time." 
"Will not escape him?" the unknown man picked up, frowning. 
"No, before a woman I presume you won't dare to run away." 
"Consider," cried Milady, seeing the gentleman reaching for his sword, 
"consider that the least delay may ruin everything." 
"You're right," cried the gentleman. "You go your way, and I'll go 
mine." 
And nodding to the lady in farewell, he leaped onto his horse, while 
the coachman vigorously whipped up his team. The two interlocutors thus 
set out at a gallop, moving off along opposite sides of the road. 
"Hey, your expenses!" shouted the host, whose affection for his traveler 
had changed to a deep contempt, seeing him go off without settling his 
accounts. 
"Pay the rascal," the traveler, still galloping, cried to his lackey, who 
threw two or three silver pieces at the host's feet and went galloping after 
his master. 
"Ah, you coward! ah, you wretch! ah, you bogus gentleman!" cried 
d'Artagnan, rushing in turn after the lackey. 
But the wounded man was still too weak to withstand such a shock. He 
had hardly gone ten steps when his ears started ringing, dizziness came 
over him, a bloody mist passed before his eyes, and he fell down in the 
middle of the road, still shouting: "Coward! coward! coward!" 
12 
The Three Musketeers 
"He is quite cowardly, in fact," murmured the host, going up to 
d'Artagnan, and trying by this flattery to make things up with the poor 
boy, like the heron of the fable with his last night's snail.16 
"Yes, quite cowardly," murmured d'Artagnan. "But she, she is quite 
beautiful!" 
"She who?" asked the host. 
"Milady," babbled d'Artagnan. 
And he passed out a second time. 
"It's all the same," said the host. "I've lost two, but I still have this one, 
whom I'm sure to keep for several days at least. That's already eleven ecus 
to the good.” 
We know that eleven ecus was exactly the sum that was left in 
d'Artagnan's purse. 
The host had reckoned on eleven days of convalescence, at one écu a 
day, but he had reckoned without his traveler. The next day, at five o'clock 
in the morning, d'Artagnan got up, went down to the kitchen by himself, 
asked for wine, oil, and rosemary, among other ingredients, the list of 
which has not come down to us, and, with his mother's recipe in his hand, 
made up a balm with which he anointed his numerous wounds, refreshing 
the compresses himself and not allowing the addition of any medicine. 
Thanks, no doubt, to the effectiveness of the Bohemian balm, and perhaps 
also to the absence of any doctor, d'Artagnan was on his feet that same 
evening and very nearly cured the next morning. 
But when he went to pay for that rosemary, that oil, and that wine, the 
master's only extra expenses, because he had kept to a strict fast, while the 
yellow horse, on the contrary, at least according to the innkeeper, had 
eaten three times more than one would reasonably have supposed from its 
size, d'Artagnan found in his pocket only the threadbare velvet purse along 
with the eleven ecus it contained, but as for the letter to M. de Tréville, it 
had disappeared. 
The young man began searching for the letter with great impatience, 
turning his pockets inside out twenty times, rummaging in his sack again 
and again; but when he arrived at the conviction that the letter was not to 
be found, he went into a third fit of rage, which nearly cost him a new 
consumption of wine and aromatic oil: for, seeing this headstrong young 
man becoming heated and threatening to smash everything in the 
establishment if they did not find his letter, the host had already seized a 
13 
I: The Three Presents of M. d'Artagnan Sr.  
pike, his wife a broom handle, and his waiters the same sticks that had 
served them two days before. 
"My letter of introduction!" cried d'Artagnan, "my letter of 
introduction, sangdieu! or I'll skewer you all like buntings!” 
Unfortunately, one circumstance kept the young man from carrying 
out his threat: this was, as we have said, that his sword had been broken in 
two during his first fight, a fact he had completely forgotten. The result 
was that, when d'Artagnan actually went to draw, he found himself armed, 
purely and simply, with a piece of sword some eight or ten inches long, 
which the host had carefully stuffed back into the scabbard. As for the rest 
of the blade, the chef had skillfully appropriated it for use as a larding 
needle. 
However, this deception would probably not have stopped our 
hotheaded young man, if the host had not reflected that the complaint his 
traveler had addressed to him was perfectly just. 
"But," he said, lowering his pike, "where indeed is that letter?" 
"Yes, where is that letter?" cried d'Artagnan. "First of all, I warn you, 
that letter is for M. de Tréville, and it must be found; or if it's not found, 
he'll know how to find it himself!" 
This threat thoroughly intimidated the host. After the king and M. le 
cardinal, M. de Tréville was the man whose name was perhaps most often 
repeated by the military, and even by townsmen. True, there was of course 
Father Joseph;17 but his name was always uttered only in hushed tones, so 
great was the terror inspired by the Gray Eminence, as the cardinal's 
familiar was known. 
And so, flinging his pike away, and ordering his wife to do the same 
with her broom handle and his servants with their sticks, he gave the first 
example by setting out in search of the lost letter himself. 
"Did that letter contain anything valuable?" the host asked, after some 
useless investigations. 
"Sandis! I should say so!" cried the Gascon, who was counting on the 
letter to make his way at court. "It contained my fortune." 
"Savings bonds?" asked the worried host. 
"Bonds on His Majesty's private treasury," replied d'Artagnan, who, 
counting on entering into the king's service thanks to this introduction, 
believed he could make that somewhat rash reply without lying. 
"Devil take it!" said the utterly desperate host. 
14 
The Three Musketeers 
"But never mind," d'Artagnan went on with his national aplomb, "never 
mind, the money's nothing—that letter was everything. I'd rather have lost 
a thousand pistoles than that letter." 
He would have risked nothing more it he had said twenty thousand, 
but a certain youthful modesty held him back. 
A ray of light suddenly struck the mind of the host, who was sending 
himself to the devil for not finding anything. 
"The letter isn't lost," he cried. 
"Ah!" said d'Artagnan. 
"No, it was taken from you." 
"Taken? But by whom?" 
"By yesterday's gentleman. He went down to the kitchen, where your 
doublet was. He was alone there. I'll bet it was he who stole it." 
"You think so?" replied d'Artagnan, little convinced; for he knew better 
than anyone the entirely personal import of the letter, and saw nothing in 
it that could tempt greed. The fact is that none of the servants, none of the 
travelers present could have gained anything by the possession of that 
piece of paper. 
"So you say," d'Artagnan picked up, "that you suspect that impertinent 
gentleman?" 
"I say to you that I'm sure of it," the host went on. "When I announced 
to him that Your Lordship was the protégé of M. de Tréville, and that you 
even had a letter for that illustrious gentleman, he looked terribly worried, 
asked me where the letter was, and went down at once to the kitchen, 
where he knew he'd find your doublet." 
"Then he's my thief," replied d'Artagnan. "I'll complain to M. de 
Tréville, and M. de Tréville will complain to the king." And he majestically 
took two ecus from his pocket, gave them to the host, who accompanied 
him to the door hat in hand, and got back on his yellow horse, which 
brought him without further incident to the porte Saint-Antoine in Paris, 
where its owner sold it for three ecus—a very good price, considering that 
d'Artagnan had badly overtaxed it during the last stage. The horse dealer 
to whom d'Artagnan surrendered it for the abovementioned nine livres did 
not conceal from the young man that he was paying that exorbitant sum 
only because of the originality of its color. 
D'Artagnan thus entered Paris on foot, carrying his little pack over his 
arm, and walked on until he found a room suited to the scantiness of his 
15 
II: M. de Tréville's Antechamber  
resources. This room was a sort of garret, situated on the rue des 
Fossoyeurs near the Luxembourg.18 
Having paid down his key money, d'Artagnan took possession of his 
lodgings and spent the rest of the day sewing braid to his doublet and hose 
that his mother had removed from an almost new doublet of M. 
d'Artagnan Sr. and given him in secret. Then he went to the quai de la 
Ferraille and had his sword fitted with a new blade; then he went back to 
the Louvre to find out from the first musketeer he met the whereabouts of 
the hôtel of M. de Tréville, which was located on the rue du Vieux
Colombier, that is, just in the neighborhood of the room d'Artagnan had 
taken—a circumstance which to him seemed to augur well for the success 
of his journey. 
After which, content with the way he had conducted himself at Meung, 
with no remorse for the past, confident in the present, and full of hope for 
the future, he went to bed and slept the sleep of the brave. 
This sleep, still quite provincial, stayed with him till nine o'clock in the 
morning, at which hour he got up to go to this famous M. de Tréville, the 
third personage of the realm in his father's estimation. 
II: M. de Tréville's Antechamber 
M. de Troisvilles, as his family was still known in Gascony, or M. de 
Tréville, as he had ended by calling himself in Paris, had really begun like 
d'Artagnan, that is, without a penny to his name, but with that wealth of 
audacity, wit, and understanding which makes it so that the poorest 
Gascon squireling often receives more from his hopes of a paternal 
inheritance than the richest gentleman of Périgord or Berry receives in 
reality. His dauntless bravery, his still more dauntless luck, in a time when 
the blows poured down like hail, had raised him to the top of that difficult 
ladder known as court favor, which he had taken four rungs at a time. 
He was the friend of the king, who, as everyone knows, greatly 
honored the memory of his father, Henri IV. M. de Tréville's father had 
served him so loyally in his wars against the League19 that, for lack of ready 
cash—something the Béarnais lacked all his life, constantly paying his 
debts with the one thing he never needed to borrow, that is, with wit—for 
lack of ready cash, as we have said, he had authorized him, after the 
surrender of Paris, to take for his coat of arms a golden lion passant upon 
16 
The Three Musketeers 
gules with the motto: Fidelis et fortis.2 That did much for his honor, but 
little for his prosperity. And so, when the great Henri's illustrious 
companion died, the only inheritance he left his son was his sword and his 
motto. Thanks to this double gift, and to the spotless name that 
accompanied it, M. de Tréville was admitted to the house of the young 
prince, where he served so well with his sword and was so loyal to his 
motto that Louis XIII, one of the best blades in the realm, got into the 
habit of saying, if he had a friend who was fighting a duel, that as seconds 
he would advise him to take himself first and then Tréville, and perhaps 
even the other way round. 
And so Louis XIII had a real affection for Tréville—a royal affection, an 
egoistic affection, true, but an affection nonetheless. The fact is that, in 
those unfortunate times, one tried hard to surround oneself with men of 
Tréville's temper. Many could take as their motto the epithet "strong," 
which was the second part of his epigraph, but few gentlemen could lay 
claim to the epithet "faithful," which formed the first part. Tréville was one 
of the latter; he was one of those rare organizations, of an obedient 
intelligence like that of a mastiff, of blind valor, of quick eye, of prompt 
hand, who had been given eyes only in order to see if the king was 
displeased with someone, a Besme, a Maurevers, a Poltrot de Méré, a 
Vitry.20 Finally, all Tréville had lacked till then was the occasion; but he 
watched out for it, and firmly promised himself to seize it by its three hairs 
if it ever came within reach of his hand. And so Louis XIII made Tréville 
captain of his musketeers, who in their devotion, or rather fanaticism, 
were for Louis XIII what his regulars were for Henri III and what his Scots 
Guard was for Louis XL. 
On his side, and in this respect, the cardinal was not to be outdone by 
the king. When he saw the formidable élite Louis XIII had surrounded 
himself with, this second, or, rather, this first king of France wanted to 
have a guard of his own. Thus he had his musketeers as Louis XIII had his, 
and these two rival powers were seen in all the provinces of France, and 
even in all foreign states, selecting men for their service who were famous 
for great strokes of the sword. And so Richelieu and Louis XIII often 
argued, during their evening game of chess, over the merits of their 
servants. Each boasted of the bearing and courage of his own, and while 
2 In heraldry, a golden lion on a red background, walking to the right and looking straight ahead, 
with three paws on the ground and the right forepaw raised. The Latin motto means "faithful and 
strong." 
17 
II: M. de Tréville's Antechamber  
pronouncing themselves aloud against duels and brawling, they quietly 
encouraged them to go at it, and felt genuine sorrow or immoderate joy at 
the defeat or victory of their men. So, at least, it is said in the memoirs of a 
man who took part in some of those defeats and many of those victories. 
Tréville had grasped his master's weak side, and it was to that 
cleverness that he owed the long and constant favor of a king who has not 
left behind the reputation of having been very faithful in his friendships. 
He paraded his musketeers before Cardinal Armand Duplessis with a 
sardonic air that made His Eminence's gray mustache bristle with wrath. 
Tréville understood admirably well the warfare of that period, when, if you 
did not live at the enemy's expense, you lived at the expense of your 
compatriots: his soldiers formed a legion of daredevils, undisciplined for 
anyone else but him. 
Slovenly, tipsy, scruffy, the king's musketeers, or rather M. de 
Tréville's, spread themselves about the taverns, the promenades, the 
gambling halls, shouting loudly and twirling their mustaches, clanking 
their swords, bumping delightedly into M. le cardinal's guards when they 
met them, then drawing in the middle of the street with a thousand jests; 
sometimes killed, but sure then of being mourned and avenged; often 
killing, but sure then of not rotting in prison, M. de Tréville being there to 
reclaim them. And so M. de Tréville was praised in all tones, sung in all 
keys by these men who adored him, and who, gallows birds that they were, 
trembled before him like schoolboys before their master, obeying at the 
least word, and ready to get themselves killed in order to wipe out the least 
reproach. 
M. de Tréville had used this powerful lever for the king, first of all, and 
the king's friends—and then for himself and his friends. Moreover, in none 
of the memoirs of that time, which has left so many memoirs, do we find 
that this worthy gentleman had been accused, even by his enemies—and 
he had as many among quillsmen as among swordsmen—nowhere, as we 
said, do we find that this worthy gentleman had been accused of profiting 
from the cooperation of his henchmen. With a rare genius for intrigue, 
which made him a match for the best intriguers, he remained an honest 
man. What's more, despite great crippling sword strokes and arduous, 
exhausting exercises, he had become one of the most gallant men about 
town, one of the most discriminating of ladies' men, and one of the most 
refined sweet talkers of his time. The successes of Tréville were spoken of 
as those of Bassompierre21 had been spoken of twenty years before—and 
18 
The Three Musketeers 
that is saying a lot. The captain of the musketeers was thus admired, 
feared, and loved, which constitutes the apogee of human fortunes. 
Louis XIV absorbed all the lesser stars of his court in his own vast 
radiance; but his father, a sun pluribus impar,322 allowed each of his 
favorites his own personal splendor, each of his courtiers his own 
individual worth. Besides the king's levee and the cardinal's, they counted 
in Paris then more than two hundred lesser levees that were somewhat 
select. Among those two hundred lesser levees, that of Tréville was one of 
the most frequented. 
The courtyard of his hôtel, located on the rue du Vieux-Colombier, 
resembled a camp, starting from six o'clock in the morning in the summer 
and eight o'clock in the winter. Fifty or sixty musketeers, who apparently 
took turns there in order to maintain an imposing number, walked about 
constantly, armed for war and ready for anything. Up and down the length 
of one of its great stairways, on the site of which our civilization could 
build an entire house, moved a procession of Paris solicitors seeking some 
sort of favor, provincial gentlemen anxious to enlist, and lackeys decked 
out in all colors, who came to bring M. de Tréville messages from their 
masters. In the antechamber, on long circular benches, rested the elite, 
that is, those who had been summoned. A buzzing went on there from 
morning till night, while M. de Tréville, in his office adjacent to this 
antechamber, received visits, listened to complaints, gave his orders, and, 
like the king on his balcony at the Louvre, had only to go to his window to 
pass men and arms in review. 
On the day d'Artagnan presented himself, the gathering was 
impressive, above all for a provincial fresh from his province: true, this 
provincial was a Gascon, and especially at that time d'Artagnan's 
compatriots had the reputation of not being easily daunted. Indeed, once 
one had gone through the massive door, studded with long, square-headed 
nails, one landed in the midst of a troop of swordsmen who passed each 
other in the courtyard, calling out, quarreling, and playing among 
themselves. To make one's way through all these turbulent waves, one 
would have had to be an officer, a great lord, or a pretty woman. 
So it was through this crush and disorder that our young man 
advanced, his heart pounding, holding his long rapier to his lean leg, and 
keeping one hand on his hat brim, with the half smile of a provincial who 
3 "unequal to many." 
19 
II: M. de Tréville's Antechamber  
wants to put on a bold front. Having gotten past one group, he breathed 
more freely; but he realized that they were turning to look at him, and for 
the first time in his life, d'Artagnan, who till that day had had a rather 
good opinion of himself, felt ridiculous. 
When he reached the stairway, things became still worse: there were 
four musketeers on the first steps, amusing themselves with the following 
exercise, while ten or twelve of their comrades waited on the landing for 
their turn to take part in the game. 
One of them, standing on a higher step, a drawn sword in his hand, 
was preventing, or attempting to prevent, the other three from coming up. 
These other three were fencing with him, wielding extremely agile 
blades. D'Artagnan at first took their weapons for fencing foils and thought 
the tips were blunted, but he soon recognized from certain scratches that 
each blade was, on the contrary, perfectly pointed and sharpened, and at 
each of those scratches not only the spectators but the participants 
themselves laughed like fools. 
The one who occupied the upper step at this moment kept his 
adversaries at bay quite marvelously. A circle formed around them: the 
condition was that at each hit, the one touched would leave the game, 
losing his turn for an audience to the one who touched him. In five 
minutes, three were grazed, one on the wrist, another on the chin, another 
on the ear, by the defender of the step, who was himself unscathed: which 
skill, according to the agreed conventions, earned him three turns of 
preference. 
Difficult not as it was but as he wished it to be to astonish him, this 
pastime astonished our young traveler. In his province, that land where all 
the same heads become so swiftly heated, he had seen a bit more in the 
way of preliminaries to a duel, and the gasconade of these four players 
seemed to him the best of all he had heard of up to then, even in Gascony. 
He thought he had been transported to that famous country of giants 
where Gulliver went later and got so frightened;23 and yet he had not 
reached the end: there remained the landing and the antechamber. 
On the landing they no longer fought, they told stories about women, 
and in the antechamber stories about the court. On the landing, 
d'Artagnan blushed; in the antechamber, he shuddered. His lively and 
roving imagination, which in Gascony had made him devastating to young 
chambermaids and sometimes even to their young mistresses, had never 
dreamed, even in the wildest moments, of half of these amorous wonders 
20 
The Three Musketeers 
and a quarter of these gallant feats, spiced with the most well-known 
names and the least shrouded details. But if his love of good morals was 
shocked on the landing, his respect for the cardinal was scandalized in the 
antechamber. There, to his great astonishment, d'Artagnan heard 
criticized aloud the policy that made Europe tremble and the private life of 
the cardinal, which so many high and mighty lords had been punished for 
trying to penetrate: this great man, revered by M. d'Artagnan Sr., was a 
laughingstock for M. de Tréville's musketeers, who jeered at this bandy 
legs and hunched back. Some sang ditties on Mme d'Aiguillon, his 
mistress, and Mme de Combalet, his niece,24 while others got up parties 
against the cardinal-duke's pages and guards—all things that seemed 
monstrous impossibilities to d'Artagnan. 
However, when the king's name sometimes suddenly came up 
unexpectedly in the midst of all these cardinalesque gibes, a sort of gag 
stopped all these mocking mouths; the men glanced around hesitantly and 
seemed to fear the indiscretion of M. de Tréville's office wall; but soon 
some allusion brought the conversation back to His Eminence, and then 
the laughter picked up again even more, and none of his actions was 
spared the light. 
"These men are all sure to be imprisoned and hanged," d'Artagnan 
thought in terror, "and I undoubtedly with them, for once I've heard and 
understood them, I'll be held as their accomplice. What would my good 
father say, who so strongly enjoined respect for the cardinal upon me, if he 
knew I was in the society of such pagans?" 
And so, as you will have guessed without my saying it, d'Artagnan did 
not venture to involve himself in the conversation; he only looked all eyes 
and listened all ears, avidly straining his five senses so as to miss nothing, 
and despite his trust in the paternal injunctions, he felt himself brought by 
his tastes and led by his instincts to praise rather than blame the unheard
of things that were going on there. 
However, as he was a total stranger to the crowd of M. de Tréville's 
courtiers, and it was the first time he had been glimpsed in this place, 
someone came to ask him what he wanted. In reponse to this request, 
d'Artagnan very modestly gave his name, bolstered himself with the title of 
compatriot, and entreated the valet who had come to ask him this 
question to request a moment's audience for him with M. de Tréville, a 
request which the latter promised in a protective tone to transmit in the 
proper time and place. 
21 
II: M. de Tréville's Antechamber  
D'Artagnan, slightly recovered from his initial surprise, thus had 
leisure for a brief study of costumes and physiognomies. 
At the center of the most animated group was a tall musketeer, of 
haughty appearance and of a peculiarity of dress that attracted general 
attention to him. He was not, for the moment, wearing a uniform tabard, 
which in any case was not absolutely obligatory in that time of lesser 
freedom but greater independence, but a sky blue jerkin, a bit faded and 
frayed, and over this garment a magnificent baldric, embroidered in gold, 
which glittered like the sparkles that scatter over the water in bright 
sunlight. A long cloak of crimson velvet fell gracefully from his shoulders, 
revealing only the front of the splendid baldric, from which hung a 
gigantic rapier. 
This musketeer had just come off guard duty that same moment, 
complained of having a head cold, and coughed affectedly from time to 
time. That was why he had taken the cloak, as he said to those around him, 
and while he spoke from his great height, disdainfully twirling his 
mustache, everyone enthusiastically admired the embroidered baldric, and 
d'Ar-tagnan more than anyone. 
"What can you do," said the musketeer, "it's the coming fashion; it's an 
extravagance, I know very well, but it's the fashion. Besides, a man has to 
use his inheritance for something." 
"Ah, Porthos!" cried one of those present, "don't try to make us believe 
that baldric came to you by paternal generosity: it was given to you by the 
veiled lady I met you with the other Sunday near the porte Saint-Honoré." 
"No, on my honor and faith as a gentleman, I bought it myself, and out 
of my own pocket," replied the one who had just been called by the name 
of Porthos. 
"Yes," said another musketeer, "just as I bought myself this new purse 
with what my mistress put in the old one." 
"It's true," said Porthos, "and the proof is that I paid twelve pistoles for 
it." 
The admiration increased, though the doubt persisted. 
"Isn't that so, Aramis?" said Porthos, turning to another musketeer. 
This other musketeer formed a perfect contrast with the one who 
questioned him and who had just called him by the name of Aramis: he 
was a young man of twenty-two or twenty-three at most, with a naive and 
sweet expression, dark and gentle eyes, and cheeks as pink and downy as 
an autumn peach; his thin mustache traced a perfectly straight line on his 
22 
The Three Musketeers 
upper lip; his hands seemed to fear being lowered, lest their veins swell, 
and from time to time he pinched the tips of his ears to maintain their 
tender and transparent rosiness. By habit he spoke little and slowly, bowed 
frequently, laughed noiselessly, showing his teeth, which were fine and of 
which, like the rest of his person, he seemed to take the greatest care. He 
responded with an affirmative nod to his friend's appeal. 
This affirmation seemed to settle all doubts concerning the baldric; 
they continued to admire it, but no longer talked about it; and by one of 
those quick turnabouts of thought, the conversation suddenly went on to 
another subject. 
"What do you think about the story Chalais's equerry tells?"25 asked 
another musketeer, not questioning anyone directly, but on the contrary 
addressing them all. 
"And what story does he tell?" asked Porthos in a self-important tone. 
"He says he found Rochefort, the cardinal's tool, in Brussels, disguised 
as a Capuchin. Thanks to this disguise, the cursed Rochefort played M. de 
Laigues26 for the ninny he is." 
"A real ninny," said Porthos. "But is it certain?" 
"I got it from Aramis," replied the musketeer. 
"Really?" 
"Ah, you know it very well, Porthos," said Aramis. "I told it to you 
yesterday, so let's not talk about it anymore." 
"Let's not talk about it anymore—that's your opinion," Porthos picked 
up. "Let's not talk about it anymore! Damn, that's a quick end to it! Why, 
the cardinal has a man spied on, has his correspondence stolen by a traitor, 
a brigand, a scoundrel; with the aid of that spy and thanks to that 
correspondence, he has Chalais's throat cut, under the stupid pretext that 
he wanted to kill the king and marry Monsieur27 to the queen! Nobody 
knew a word of this riddle, you informed us of it yesterday, to everyone's 
great satisfaction, and while we're still all astounded by this news, you 
come today and say: 'Let's not talk about it anymore.'" 
"Let's talk about it, then, since you want to," Aramis patiently replied. 
"This Rochefort," cried Porthos, "would spend a nasty moment with 
me, if I were poor Chalais's equerry." 
"And you would spend a sorry quarter of an hour with the red duke," 
replied Aramis. 
"Ah! the red duke! Bravo, bravo—the red duke!" responded Porthos, 
clapping his hands and nodding in approval. "The 'red duke' is charming. 
23 
II: M. de Tréville's Antechamber  
I'll spread the word, my dear, rest assured. He's a wit, this Aramis! Too bad 
you didn't follow your vocation, my dear! What a delightful abbé you'd 
have made!" 
"Oh, it's just a momentary delay," replied Aramis. "Some day I'll 
become one. You know very well, Porthos, that I've continued studying 
theology for that.” 
"He'll do it as he says," Porthos picked up, "that is, sooner or later." 
"Sooner," said Aramis. 
"He's just waiting for one thing to decide on it entirely and take back 
the cassock that's hanging behind his uniform," said one musketeer. 
"And what thing is he waiting for?" asked another. 
"He's waiting for the queen to produce an heir to the Crown of France." 
"Let's not joke about that, gentlemen," said Porthos. "Thank God, the 
queen is still of an age to produce one." 
"They say that M. de Buckingham28 is in France," Aramis picked up 
with a sardonic laugh, which gave to this seemingly simple phrase a rather 
scandalous significance. 
"Aramis, my friend, this time you're wrong," interrupted Porthos, "and 
your compulsive wit always takes you beyond bounds. If M. de Tréville 
could hear you, you wouldn't speak so unfittingly." 
"Are you reading me a lesson, Porthos?" cried Aramis, in whose gentle 
eye lightning suddenly seemed to flash. 
"My dear, be a musketeer or an abbé. Be one or the other, but not one 
and the other," replied Porthos. "Look, Athos told you the other day: you 
sup from all troughs. Ah, let's not get angry, I beg you, it would be useless, 
you know very well what's been agreed among you, Athos, and me. You 
call on Mme d'Aiguillon and pay court to her; you call on Mme de Bois
Tracy, the cousin of Mme de Chevreuse,29 and you pass for being well 
advanced in the lady's good graces. Oh, my God, don't confess your 
happiness, no one's asking you your secrets, we all know your discretion! 
But since you do possess that virtue, devil take it, use it with regard to Her 
Majesty! Let anyone concern himself with the king and the cardinal if he 
likes and as he likes; but the queen is sacred, and if we speak of her, let us 
speak well." 
"Porthos, you're as conceited as Narcissus, let me tell you," responded 
Aramis. "You know I hate moralizing, except when Athos does it. As for 
you, my dear, you have too magnificent a baldric to be strong on that 
subject. I'll become an abbé if it suits me; meanwhile I'm a musketeer: in 
24 
The Three Musketeers 
that quality, I say what I please, and at this moment it pleases me to tell 
you that you annoy me." 
"Aramis!" 
"Porthos!" 
"Ah! Gentlemen! Gentlemen!" cries came from all around them. 
"M. de Tréville awaits M. d'Artagnan," the lackey interrupted, opening 
the office door. 
At that announcement, during which the office door remained open, 
everyone fell silent, and in the midst of the general silence, the young 
Gascon crossed the antechamber for a good part of its length and entered 
the office of the captain of the musketeers, congratulating himself 
wholeheartedly on escaping the end of this bizarre quarrel just in time. 
III: The Audience 
M. de Tréville was for the moment in a very bad humor. Nevertheless, 
he politely greeted the young man, who bowed all the way to the ground, 
and smiled on receiving his compliments in that Béarnais accent which 
reminded him at the same time of his youth and of his birthplace, a double 
memory that makes a man smile at any age. But, going towards the 
antechamber almost at once, and making a sign to d'Artagnan with his 
hand, as if asking his permission to finish with the others before beginning 
with him, he called out three times, raising his voice more each time, so 
that he ran through all the intermediary tones between the imperative and 
the irritated: 
"Athos! Porthos! Aramis!" 
The two musketeers whose acquaintance we have already made, and 
who answered to the last two of these three names, immediately left the 
groups they were part of and advanced towards the office, the door of 
which closed behind them the moment they crossed the threshold. Their 
bearing, though not entirely calm, still aroused d'Artagnan's admiration by 
its casualness, which was at once full of dignity and of submission. He saw 
these men as demigods and their chief as an Olympian Jupiter armed with 
all his thunderbolts. 
When the two musketeers came in; when the door was closed behind 
them; when the buzzing murmur of the antechamber, to which the 
summons that had just been made had given fresh nourishment, started 
up again; when, finally, M. de Tréville, silent and frowning, had paced the 
25 
III: The Audience  
whole length of his office three or four times, passing each time before 
Porthos and Aramis, rigid and mute as if on parade, he suddenly stopped 
in front of them and, looking them up and down with an irritated glance, 
shouted: 
"Do you know what the king said to me, and that no later than 
yesterday evening? Do you know, gentlemen?" 
"No," replied the two musketeers after a moment of silence. "No, 
Monsieur, we don't know." 
"But I hope you will do us the honor of telling us," Aramis added in his 
most polite tone and with a most graceful bow. 
"He told me he would henceforth recruit his musketeers from M. le 
cardinal's guards!" 
"From M. le cardinal's guards! And why would that be?" Porthos asked 
sharply. 
"Because he saw very well that his local vintage needed fortifying with 
a dose of good wine." 
The two musketeers blushed to the roots of their hair. D'Artagnan did 
not know what it had to do with him and wished he was a hundred feet 
underground. 
"Yes, yes," M. de Tréville continued, growing animated, "yes, and His 
Majesty is right, for, on my honor, it's true that the musketeers cut a sad 
figure at court. Yesterday, playing chess with the king, M. le cardinal told 
us, with an air of condolence which greatly displeased me, that the day 
before yesterday those damned musketeers, those daredevils—he stressed 
these words with an ironic accent that displeased me still more— those 
true destroyers, he added, looking at me with his tiger-cat's eyes, had 
stayed late at a tavern on the rue Férou, and that a patrol of his guards had 
been forced to arrest the troublemakers. Morbleu! you must know 
something about it! Arresting musketeers! You two were in on it, don't 
deny it, you were recognized, and the cardinal named you. But it's all my 
fault, yes, my fault, since it's I who pick my men. Look here, Aramis, why 
the devil did you ask me for the tabard when you would have done so well 
in a cassock? Look here, Porthos, have you got such a handsome gold 
baldric only to hang a straw sword on it? And Athos! I don't see Athos. 
Where is he?" 
"Monsieur," Aramis responded sadly, "he is ill, very ill." 
"Ill, very ill, you say? And with what illness?" 
26 
The Three Musketeers 
"They're afraid it may be smallpox, Monsieur," answered Porthos, who 
wanted to add a word of his own to the conversation, "which would be 
regrettable in that it would quite certainly spoil his looks." 
"Smallpox! That's another glorious story you're telling me, Porthos! . . . 
Sick with smallpox, at his age?... Not so! . . . but wounded, no doubt, 
maybe killed... Ah, if I'd only known! . . . Sangdieu! you gentlemen 
musketeers, I don't mean to have you haunting low places like that, 
picking quarrels in the street and playing with swords at the crossroads. I 
don't want you, finally, to give the laugh to M. le cardinal's guards, who are 
brave men, calm, clever, who never put themselves in danger of being 
arrested, and besides would not let themselves be arrested, not them! . . . 
I'm sure of it. . . They'd much rather die on the spot than retreat a single 
step ... To run away, to bolt, to flee—that's fit for the king's musketeers!" 
Porthos and Aramis were trembling with rage. They would gladly have 
strangled M. de Tréville, if at the bottom of it all they had not felt that it 
was the great love he bore them which made him speak to them that way. 
They stamped the carpet with their feet, bit their lips until they bled, and 
gripped the hilts of their swords with all their might. Outside, as we have 
said, the others had heard Athos, Porthos, and Aramis summoned, and had 
guessed, by the accent of M. de Tréville's voice, that he was in perfect 
wrath. Ten curious heads were pressed against the tapestry and turned 
pale with fury, for their ears, glued to the door, did not miss a single 
syllable of what was said, while their lips repeated the captain's insulting 
words bit by bit to the whole population of the antechamber. In an instant, 
from office door to street door, the entire hôtel was in turmoil. 
"So the king's musketeers get arrested by M. le cardinal's guards!" M. 
de Tréville went on, inwardly as furious as his soldiers, but halting at each 
word and plunging them one by one, so to speak, like so many thrusts of a 
stiletto, into the breasts of his listeners. "So six of His Eminence's guards 
arrest six of His Majesty's musketeers! Morbleu! I've made my choice! I'm 
going straight to the Louvre! I shall turn in my resignation as captain of the 
king's musketeers and ask for a lieutenancy in the cardinal's guards, and if 
he refuses me, morbleu, I'll become an abbé!" 
At these words, the murmur outside became an explosion: everywhere 
one heard nothing but oaths and blasphemies. The "morbleus," the 
"sangdieus," the "forty pockmarked devils" crisscrossed in the air. 
D'Artagnan looked for a tapestry to hide behind, and felt an immense 
desire to crawl under the table. 
27 
III: The Audience  
"Well, then, Captain," said Porthos, beside himself, "the truth is that 
we were six against six, but we were set upon treacherously, and before we 
had time to draw our swords, two of us had fallen dead, and Athos, 
grievously wounded, was hardly worth more. For you know Athos. Well, 
Captain, he tried to get up twice, and he fell back twice. But all the same 
we didn't surrender. No! We were dragged off by force. On the way, we 
escaped. As for Athos, they thought he was dead, and they left him quite 
calmly on the battlefield, thinking he wasn't worth carrying off. That's the 
story. Devil take it, Captain, you can't win every battle! The great Pompey 
lost at Pharsalia, and King François I, I've heard tell, was as good a man as 
any, yet he lost at Pavia."30 
"And I have the honor of assuring you that I killed one of them with his 
own sword," said Aramis, "for mine was broken at the first parry ... Killed 
or stabbed, Monsieur, whichever you please." 
"I didn't know that," M. de Tréville picked up in a slightly softened 
tone. "M. le cardinal was exaggerating, as I see." 
"But, for pity's sake, Monsieur," continued Aramis, who, seeing his 
captain calm down, dared to venture an entreaty, "for pity's sake, 
Monsieur, don't say that Athos himself is wounded: he would be in despair 
if it came to the ears of the king, and as the wound is most grave, seeing 
that after passing through the shoulder it penetrated the chest, it is to be 
feared ..." 
At that same instant the portière was raised, and a noble, handsome, 
but dreadfully pale head appeared under the fringe. 
"Athos!" cried the two musketeers. 
"Athos!" repeated M. de Tréville himself. 
"You sent for me, Monsieur," Athos said to M. de Tréville in a 
weakened but perfectly calm voice, "you sent for me, as our comrades have 
told me, and I hasten to respond to your orders. Well, Monsieur, what do 
you want of me?" 
And at those words the musketeer, irreproachably dressed, tightly 
belted as was his custom, entered the office with a firm stride. M. de 
Tréville, moved to the bottom of his heart by this show of courage, rushed 
to him. 
"I was just telling these gentlemen," he added, "that I forbid my 
musketeers to risk their lives unnecessarily, for brave men are very dear to 
the king, and the king knows that his musketeers are the bravest men on 
earth. Your hand, Athos." 
28 
The Three Musketeers 
And without waiting for the newcomer to respond to this show of 
affection himself, M. de Tréville seized his right hand and pressed it with 
all his might, not noticing that Athos, for all his self-mastery, let escape a 
wince of pain and grew paler still, which one would have thought 
impossible. 
The door had been left ajar, such was the sensation made by the arrival 
of Athos, whose wound, despite the well-kept secret, was known to 
everyone. A hubbub of satisfaction greeted the captain's last words, and 
two or three heads, carried away by the enthusiasm, appeared through the 
openings in the tapestry. M. de Tréville was no doubt on the point of 
sharply reprimanding this infraction of the rules of etiquette, when he 
suddenly felt Athos's hand clench in his own, and, turning his eyes to him, 
saw that he was about to faint. Athos, who had summoned all his forces to 
struggle against the pain, was finally defeated by it, and fell to the floor like 
a dead man. 
"A surgeon!" cried M. de Tréville. "Mine, the king's, the best! A 
surgeon, sangdieu! or my brave Athos will depart this life." 
At M. de Tréville's cries, everyone rushed into his office, for he never 
thought of closing the door on anyone, each of them coming to the 
wounded man's aid. But all this concern would have been useless, if the 
doctor sent for had not been found right in the hôtel itself. He broke 
through the crowd, approached the still unconscious Athos, and, as all this 
noise and movement hampered him greatly, demanded first and most 
urgently that the musketeer be carried to a neighboring room. M. de 
Tréville opened a door at once and showed the way to Porthos and Aramis, 
who carried their comrade in their arms. Behind this group came the 
surgeon, and behind the surgeon, the door was closed. 
Then M. de Tréville's office, ordinarily so respected a place, 
momentarily became a subsidiary to the antechamber. Everyone held 
forth, declaimed, spoke out, cursing, swearing, sending the cardinal and 
his guards to all the devils. 
A moment later, Porthos and Aramis reappeared; the surgeon and M. 
de Tréville alone had stayed by the wounded man. 
Finally M. de Tréville reappeared in his turn. The wounded man had 
recovered consciousness; the surgeon declared that there was nothing in 
the musketeer's condition that should worry his friends, his weakness 
having been caused purely and simply by loss of blood. 
29 
III: The Audience  
Then M. de Tréville gave a sign of the hand, and they all withdrew, 
except for d'Artagnan, who had by no means forgotten that he had an 
audience and who, with a Gascon's tenacity, had stayed where he was. 
When everyone was gone and the door was closed again, M. de Tréville 
turned and found himself alone with the young man. The event that had 
just occurred had made him lose the thread of his thoughts somewhat. He 
asked what the obstinate petitioner wanted of him. D'Artagnan then gave 
his name, and M. de Tréville, recalling at a single stroke all his memories 
both present and past, found himself informed of the situation. 
"Forgive me," he said with a smile, "forgive me, my dear compatriot, 
but I had completely forgotten you. No help for it! A captain is nothing but 
the father of a family, burdened with greater responsibility than the 
ordinary father of a family. Soldiers are big children; but as I insist that the 
orders of the king, and above all those of M. le cardinal, be carried out..." 
D'Artagnan could not conceal a smile. At that smile, M. de Tréville 
decided that he was by no means dealing with a fool and changed the 
subject, coming straight to the point. 
"I loved your good father very much," he said. "What can I do for his 
son? Be quick, my time is not my own." 
"Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "in leaving Tarbes and coming here, my 
intention was to ask you, in memory of that friendship which you have not 
forgotten, for the tabard of a musketeer; but, after all I've seen in the last 
two hours, I realize that it would be an enormous favor, and I fear I am not 
at all worthy of it." 
"It is indeed a favor, young man," answered M. de Tréville, "but it may 
not be so far above you as you believe, or as you seem to believe. However, 
a decision of His Majesty has provided for this case, and I regret to inform 
you that no one is made a musketeer without the prior proof of several 
campaigns, of certain brilliant actions, or two years of service in some 
other regiment less favored than ours." 
D'Artagnan accepted without any reply. He felt all the more eager to 
put on the uniform of a musketeer, since there were such great difficulties 
in obtaining it. 
"But," Tréville went on, fixing such a piercing gaze on his compatriot 
that one would have thought he wanted to read to the bottom of his heart, 
"but, for the sake of your father, my old companion, as I have told you, I 
would like to do something for you, young man. Our cadets from Bearn are 
ordinarily not rich, and I doubt that things have changed greatly since I 
30 
The Three Musketeers 
left the province. So you must not have much to live on from the money 
you brought with you." 
D'Artagnan drew himself up with a proud air which meant to say that 
he asked no alms of anyone. 
"Very well, young man, very well," Tréville went on, "I know those airs. 
I came to Paris with four ecus in my pocket, and I'd have fought with 
anybody who told me I was in no condition to buy the Louvre." 
D'Artagnan drew himself up still more. Thanks to the sale of his horse, 
he was beginning his career with four ecus more than M. de Tréville had 
begun his with. 
"So, as I was saying, you must have a need to hold on to what you've 
got, great as that sum may be; but you must also have a need to perfect 
yourself in the exercises proper to a gentleman. I will write a letter today to 
the director of the Royal Academy,31 and as of tomorrow he will admit you 
without any payment. Do not refuse this small kindness. Our best born 
and richest gentlemen sometimes seek it without managing to obtain it. 
You will learn horsemanship, fencing, and dancing; you will make good 
acquaintances there; and from time to time you will come back to see me 
and tell me where you've gotten to and if there's anything I can do for 
you." 
D'Artagnan, stranger as he still was to court manners, found a certain 
coolness in this reception. 
"Alas, Monsieur," he said, "I see how great a loss the letter of 
introduction my father gave me for you is to me today." 
"Indeed," replied M. de Tréville, "I was surprised that you should have 
undertaken such a long journey without this obligatory viaticum, the only 
resource known to us Béarnais." 
"I had it, Monsieur, and, thank God, in fine form," cried d'Artagnan, 
"but somebody perfidiously robbed me of it." 
And he recounted the whole scene at Meung, depicting the unknown 
gentleman in the minutest detail, and all of it with a warmth, a 
truthfulness that charmed M. de Tréville. 
"That's a strange thing," the latter said, pondering. "So you mentioned 
my name aloud?" 
"Yes, Monsieur, I undoubtedly committed that imprudence; but what 
do you want, a name like yours was to serve me as a shield on the way: you 
may judge how often I took cover behind it!" 
31 
III: The Audience  
Flattery was quite an acceptable thing then, and M. de Tréville loved 
incense as much as any king or cardinal. So he could not help smiling with 
visible satisfaction, but his smile soon vanished, and he returned to the 
adventure in Meung. 
"Tell me," he went on, "did this gentleman have a slight scar on his 
temple?" 
"Yes, the kind left by the graze of a bullet." 
"Was he a fine-looking man?" 
"Yes." 
"Tall?" 
"Yes." 
"Pale-skinned and brown-haired?" 
"Yes, yes, that's right. How is it, Monsieur, that you know this man? 
Ah! if ever I find him again, and I will find him, I swear to you, even in 
hell..." 
"He was waiting for a woman?" Tréville went on. 
"At least he left after talking for a moment with the woman he was 
waiting for." 
"You wouldn't know what the subject of their conversation was?" 
"He gave her a box, told her the box contained her instructions, and 
advised her not to open it until she got to London." 
"The woman was English?" 
"He called her 'Milady.' " 
"It's he," murmured Tréville, "it's he! I thought he was still in Brussels." 
"Oh, Monsieur, if you know this man," cried d'Artagnan, "tell me who 
he is and where he is, and then I won't hold you to anything else, not even 
your promise to take me into the musketeers; for before all else I want to 
avenge myself!” 
"Don't even try it, young man," cried Tréville. "On the contrary, if you 
see him coming down one side of the street, cross to the other! Don't hurl 
yourself against such a rock: he'll smash you like a glass." 
"All the same," said d'Artagnan, "if I ever find him again ..." 
"Meanwhile," Tréville picked up, "don't go looking for him, if I have 
one piece of advice to give you." 
Tréville stopped all at once, struck by a sudden suspicion. The great 
hatred that the young traveler made such a display of for this man who, 
unlikely as it was, had robbed him of his father's letter—did this hatred not 
conceal some perfidy? Had this young man not been sent by His 
32 
The Three Musketeers 
Eminence? Had he not come to set some trap for him? Was this would-be 
d'Artagnan not an emissary from the cardinal whom they sought to 
introduce into his house, and whom they had placed close to him in order 
to betray his confidence and to ruin him afterwards, as had been done a 
thousand times before? He looked at d'Artagnan still more fixedly this 
second time than he had the first. He was not much reassured by the sight 
of that physiognomy sparkling with sly wit and affected humility. 
"I know very well he's a Gascon," he thought, "but he can just as well be 
a Gascon for the cardinal as for me. Come, let's test him." 
"My friend," he said to him slowly, "I would like, as for the son of my 
old friend—for I take the story of that lost letter to be true—I would like, I 
say, in order to make up for the coolness you noticed at first in my 
reception, to reveal to you the secrets of our policy. The king and the 
cardinal are the best of friends; their apparent disputes are meant only to 
deceive fools. I do not intend that a compatriot, a fine cavalier, a brave lad, 
made for advancement, should be the dupe of all this trumpery and run his 
head into the wall like a ninny, in the wake of so many others who have 
perished from it. Understand well that I am devoted to these two all
powerful masters, and that my serious efforts will never have any other 
end than service to the king and to M. le cardinal, one of the most 
illustrious geniuses France has ever produced. Now, young man, rule 
yourself by that, and if you have, either from your family, or through 
relations, or even by instinct, any of those hostile feelings against the 
cardinal such as we see break out among these gentlemen, say good-bye to 
me, and let us part. I will help you in a thousand circumstances, but 
without attaching you to my person. I hope that my frankness, in any case, 
will make you my friend; for up to the present you are the only young man 
to whom I have spoken as I am speaking now." 
Tréville said to himself: "If the cardinal has sent me this young fox, he 
will certainly not have failed, he who knows how much I loathe him, to tell 
his spy that the best way to pay court to me is to tell me the worst muck 
about him; so, despite my protestations, the cunning accomplice is quite 
certainly going to answer me that he holds His Eminence in horror.” 
But it turned out quite differently than Tréville expected. D'Artagnan 
replied with the greatest simplicity: 
"Monsieur, I have come to Paris with exactly the same intentions. My 
father instructed me to bear with nothing except from the king, M. le 
cardinal, and you, whom he held to be the three foremost men in France." 
33 
III: The Audience  
D'Artagnan added M. de Tréville to the two others, as we can see, but 
he thought the addition would not hurt anything. 
"I thus have the greatest veneration for M. le cardinal," he went on, 
"and the most profound respect for his acts. So much the better for me, 
Monsieur, if you speak to me, as you say, with frankness; for then you do 
me the honor of valuing this similarity of taste. But if you have felt some 
mistrust, quite natural in any case, I will feel that I am erring by telling the 
truth. That is too bad, but you will esteem me nonetheless, and I care more 
about that than about anything else in the world." 
M. de Tréville was utterly astonished. So much penetration, so much 
frankness, finally, aroused his admiration, but did not entirely remove his 
doubts: the more superior this young man was to other young people, the 
more he was to be feared if he was mistaken. Nevertheless, he shook 
d'Artagnan's hand and said to him: 
"You're an honest lad, but at the moment I can do no more than what I 
offered you earlier. My hôtel will always be open to you. Later on, being 
able to ask for me at any hour and therefore to seize every opportunity, 
you will probably obtain what you wish to obtain." 
"That is to say, Monsieur," replied d'Artagnan, "that you are waiting 
until I make myself worthy. Well, don't worry," he added with Gascon 
familiarity, "you won't have to wait long." 
And he began bowing his way out, as if the rest was henceforth up to 
him. 
"But wait a moment," said M. de Tréville, stopping him, "I promised 
you a letter to the director of the Academy. Are you too proud to accept it, 
my young gentleman?" 
"No, Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "and I give you my word that what 
happened to the other will not happen to this one. I'll keep it so well that it 
will arrive at its destination, I swear to you, and woe to him who tries to 
take it from me!" 
M. de Tréville smiled at this fanfaronade, and leaving his young 
compatriot in the embrasure of the window where they found themselves 
and where they had talked together, he sat down at a table and began 
writing the promised letter of introduction. During this time, d'Artagnan, 
who had nothing better to do, started beating out a march on the window 
panes, watching the musketeers who went out one after another, and 
following them until they disappeared around the corner. 
34 
The Three Musketeers 
M. de Tréville, after writing the letter, sealed it and, getting up, went 
over to the young man to give it to him; but at the very moment when 
d'Artagnan held out his hand to receive it, M. de Tréville was quite 
astonished to see him give a start, flush with anger, and go rushing out of 
the office, shouting: 
"Ah! sangdieu! he won't escape me this time!" 
"But who is it?" asked M. de Tréville. 
"He, my thief!" answered d'Artagnan. "Ah! the traitor!" 
And he disappeared. 
"Mad devil!" murmured M. de Tréville. "Unless," he added, "it's a 
skillful means of slipping away, seeing that his attempt failed." 
IV: Athos's Shoulder, Porthos's Baldric, and Aramis's 
Handkerchief 
D'Artagnan, furious, had crossed the antechamber in three bounds and 
was rushing for the stairway, where he counted on going down the steps 
four at a time, when, carried away by his chase, he ran head first into a 
musketeer who was coming out of M. de Tréville's by a side door, and, 
butting him in the shoulder, made him utter a cry, or rather a howl. 
"Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, trying to race on, "excuse me, but I'm in 
a hurry." 
But he had hardly gone down the first stair when an iron fist seized 
him by the sash and halted him. 
"You're in a hurry!" cried the musketeer, pale as a shroud. "Under that 
pretext, you butt into me, say 'Excuse me,' and think that's enough? Not at 
all, my young man. Do you think, because you heard M. de Tréville speak 
to us a bit cavalierly today, that you can treat us the way he speaks to us? 
Think again, friend, you are not M. de Tréville." 
"By heaven," replied d'Artagnan, recognizing Athos, who, after the 
bandaging performed by the doctor, was returning to his apartment, "by 
heaven, I didn't do it on purpose, and I said 'Excuse me.' So it seems to me 
that that is enough. I repeat to you, however—and this time, on my honor, 
it may be too much!—that I am in a hurry. Release me, I beg you, and let 
me go about my business." 
"Monsieur," said Athos, releasing him, "you are not polite. One can see 
you come from far away." 
35 
IV: Athos's Shoulder, Porthos's Baldric, and Aramis's 
Handkerchief  
D'Artagnan had already gone down three or four steps, but Athos's 
remark pulled him up short. 
"Morbleu, Monsieur!" he said, "however far away I come from, it is not 
for you to give me a lesson in good manners, let me tell you." 
"Perhaps," said Athos. 
"Ah! if I wasn't in such a hurry," cried d'Artagnan, "and if I wasn't 
running after someone ..." 
"Monsieur-in-a-hurry, you will find me without having to run, 
understand?" 
"And where is that, if you please?" 
"By the Carmes-Deschaux."32 
"At what time?" 
"Around noon." 
"Around noon, then. I'll be there." 
"Try not to keep me waiting, for at a quarter past noon, I warn you, it is 
I who will go running after you, and I'll cut your ears off on the run." 
"Fine!" d'Artagnan shouted to him. "I'll be there at ten to noon!" 
And he set off running as if the devil was after him, still hoping to find 
his unknown man, whose leisurely pace could not have taken him far. 
But at the street door Porthos was talking with a soldier of the guards. 
Between the two talkers there was just the space of a man. D'Artagnan 
thought the space was enough for him, and he shot like an arrow between 
the two of them. But d'Artagnan had not counted on the wind. As he 
passed through, the wind swelled out Porthos's long cloak, and d'Artagnan 
dove straight into it. Porthos undoubtedly had reasons for not abandoning 
this essential part of his clothing, for instead of letting go of the side he 
was holding, he pulled it to him, so that d'Artagnan was rolled up in the 
velvet by a rotating movement explained by Porthos's stubborn resistance. 
D'Artagnan heard the musketeer curse, wanted to get out from under 
the cloak that was blinding him, and sought his way through the folds. 
Above all he was afraid of damaging the magnificent baldric we are 
acquainted with; but, on timidly opening his eyes, he found his nose 
pressed between Porthos's shoulders, that is, precisely against the baldric. 
Alas! like most things in this world that have nothing to boast of but 
their appearance, the baldric was gold in front and simple buff behind. 
Porthos, vainglorious as he was, unable to have an all-gold baldric, at least 
had one by half: the necessity of the head cold and the urgency of the cloak 
thus became comprehensible. 
36 
The Three Musketeers 
"Vertubleu!" cried Porthos, doing his best to rid himself of d'Artagnan, 
who was scrambling about on his back, "you must be mad to go throwing 
yourself at people like that!" 
"Excuse me," said d'Artagnan, reappearing from under the giant's 
shoulder, "but I'm in a great hurry, I'm running after someone, and ..." 
"And do you forget your eyes when you run, by any chance?" asked 
Porthos. 
"No," replied d'Artagnan, nettled, "no, and thanks to my eyes I even see 
what others don't see." 
Porthos may or may not have understood, but in any case, giving way 
to his anger, he said: 
"Monsieur, you'll get roughed up, I warn you, if you rub musketeers the 
wrong way." 
"Roughed up, Monsieur!" said d'Artagnan. "That's a harsh word." 
"It's the right word for a man accustomed to looking his enemies in the 
face." 
"Ah! Pardieu! I know very well you won't turn your back on them!" 
And the young man, delighted with his waggishness, walked away 
laughing his head off. 
Porthos seethed with rage and was about to hurl himself at d'Artagnan. 
"Later, later," cried the young man, "when you're no longer wearing 
your cloak." 
"At one o'clock, then, behind the Luxembourg." 
"Very well, at one o'clock," replied d'Artagnan, turning the corner. 
But neither on the street he had just walked down, nor on the one he 
now took in at a glance, did he see anyone. Slowly as the unknown man 
had been walking, he had still gotten away; or perhaps he had gone into 
some house. D'Artagnan inquired about him from everyone he met, went 
down as far as the ferry,33 came back up by the rue de Seine and the Croix
Rouge—nothing, absolutely nothing. However, the chase was profitable to 
him in this sense, that as the sweat drenched his forehead, his heart cooled 
down. 
Then he began to reflect on the events that had just occurred. They 
were many and ill-fated. It was barely eleven o'clock in the morning, and 
the day had already brought him into disgrace with M. de Tréville, who 
could not fail to find the manner in which d'Artagnan had left him a bit 
cavalier. 
37 
IV: Athos's Shoulder, Porthos's Baldric, and Aramis's 
Handkerchief  
Moreover, he had picked up two fine duels with two men, each of 
whom was capable of killing three d'Artagnans, with two musketeers 
finally, that is, with two of those beings whom he esteemed so highly that, 
in his mind and in his heart, he placed them above all other men. 
It was a sad prospect. Sure of being killed by Athos, it is 
understandable that the young man did not worry much about Porthos. 
And yet, as hope is the last thing to die in a man's heart, he came to hope 
that he might survive these two duels, with terrible wounds, of course, and 
in case of survival, he gave himself the following two reprimands for the 
future: 
"What a birdbrain I was, and what a boor I am! This brave and 
unfortunate Athos was wounded in just the shoulder I ran into, butting 
him like a ram. The one thing that surprises me is that he didn't kill me on 
the spot. He had every right to, and the pain I caused him must have been 
atrocious. As for Porthos—oh, as for Porthos, my God, that's much 
funnier!" 
And despite himself the young man started to laugh, though still 
looking out for whether this isolated laughter, and with no cause apparent 
to those who saw him laugh, might not offend some passerby. 
"As for Porthos, that's much funnier, but that doesn't make me less of a 
scatterbrain. Does one charge into people that way without any warning? 
No! And does one go looking under their cloaks for what isn't there? He'd 
certainly have forgiven me; he'd have forgiven me if I hadn't gone and 
mentioned that cursed baldric to him—in veiled terms, it's true; yes, 
prettily veiled! Ah! cursed Gascon that I am, I'd make jokes in the frying 
pan! Come, d'Artagnan my friend," he continued, talking to himself with 
all the amenity he thought was his due, "if you come through, which is 
unlikely, it's a question in future of being of the most perfect politeness. 
Henceforth you must be admired, you must be held up as a model. To be 
considerate and polite is not to be a coward. Rather look at Aramis: Aramis 
is all gentleness, he is grace personified. Well, then, did anyone ever dare 
say that Aramis was a coward? No, certainly not, and henceforth I intend 
to model myself on him in every point. Ah! here he is!" 
D'Artagnan, while walking along and soliloquizing, had come within a 
few steps of the hôtel d'Aiguillon,34 and in front of this hôtel he caught 
sight of Aramis talking gaily with three gentlemen of the king's guards. 
Aramis, for his part, also caught sight of d'Artagnan, but as he had by no 
means forgotten that it was before this young man that M. de Tréville had 
38 
The Three Musketeers 
flown into such a temper that morning, and that a witness to the 
upbraiding the musketeers had received was in no way agreeable to him, 
he pretended not to see him. 
D'Artagnan was not so foolish as to fail to perceive that he was one too 
many; but he was not yet so broken to the ways of society as to gallantly 
get himself out of such a false situation as is generally that of a man who 
comes to mix with people he hardly knows and in a conversation that does 
not concern him. He was thus racking his brains for a means of making his 
retreat with the least possible awkwardness, when he noticed that Aramis 
had dropped his handkerchief and, no doubt inadvertently, had placed his 
foot on it. It seemed to him that the moment had come to make up for his 
impropriety: he bent down and, with the most graceful air he could 
muster, drew the handkerchief from under the musketeer's foot, for all the 
efforts the latter made to keep it there, and said as he handed it to him: 
"I believe, Monsieur, that this is a handkerchief you would be sorry to 
lose." 
The handkerchief was indeed richly embroidered and bore a coronet 
and a coat of arms at one of its corners. Aramis blushed exceedingly and 
tore rather than took the handkerchief from the Gascon's hands. 
"Aha!" cried one of the guards. "Will you still say, discreet Aramis, that 
you're on bad terms with Mme de Bois-Tracy, when the gracious lady is 
kind enough to lend you her handkerchiefs?" 
Aramis shot d'Artagnan one of those glances which make a man 
understand that he has just acquired a mortal enemy. Then, resuming his 
suave air, he said: "You're mistaken, gentlemen, this handkerchief isn't 
mine, and I don't know what whim made Monsieur give it to me rather 
than to one of you. The proof of what I'm saying is that my own is here in 
my pocket." 
With those words he pulled out his own handkerchief, a very elegant 
one as well, and of fine cambric, though cambric was costly at that time, 
but a handkerchief without embroidery, without a coat of arms, and 
ornamented with a single initial, that of its owner. 
This time d'Artagnan did not breathe a word; he had realized his 
blunder; but Aramis's friends would not be convinced by his denials, and 
one of them, turning to Aramis with affected seriousness, said: 
"If it were as you claim, I would be forced, my dear Aramis, to demand 
it back from you; for, as you know, Bois-Tracy is among my intimates, and 
I do not want anyone to make a trophy of his wife's belongings." 
39 
IV: Athos's Shoulder, Porthos's Baldric, and Aramis's 
Handkerchief  
"Your demand is ill put," replied Aramis, "and while I recognize the 
fundamental fairness of your objection, I refuse on account of the form." 
"The fact is," d'Artagnan ventured timidly, "that I didn't see the 
handkerchief come from M. Aramis's pocket. He had his foot on it, that's 
all, and I thought, since he had his foot on it, that the handkerchief was 
his." 
"And you were mistaken, my dear Monsieur," Aramis replied coldly, 
little sensible of the amends. 
Then, turning to the guard who had declared himself a friend of Bois
Tracy, he continued: 
"Besides, it occurs to me, my dear intimate of Bois-Tracy, that I am no 
less loving a friend of his than you may be yourself; so that, strictly 
speaking, this handkerchief could just as well have come from your pocket 
as from mine." 
"No, on my honor!" cried His Majesty's guard. 
"You will swear on your honor and I on my word, which means that 
one of us will obviously be lying. Wait, let's do better, Montaran, let's each 
take a half." 
"Of the handkerchief?" 
"Yes." 
"Perfect," cried the other two guards, "the judgment of Solomon.35 
Decidedly, Aramis, you are filled with wisdom." 
The young men burst out laughing, and, as we might well expect, the 
affair had no further consequences. A moment later, the conversation 
came to an end, and the three guards and the musketeer, after cordially 
shaking hands, went off, the three guards one way and Aramis the other. 
"Now's the moment to make peace with this gallant man," d'Artagnan 
said to himself, having stood aside during the whole last part of this 
conversation. And, with that good sentiment, he went up to Aramis, who 
was going away without paying any further attention to him, and said: 
"Monsieur, you will excuse me, I hope." 
"Ah! Monsieur," Aramis interrupted, "allow me to observe to you that 
in this circumstance you have by no means acted as befits a gallant man." 
"What, Monsieur!" cried d'Artagnan. "Do you suppose ..." 
"I suppose, Monsieur, that you are not a fool, and that you know very 
well, though you come from Gascony, that one does not step on pocket 
handkerchiefs without a reason. Devil take it! Paris isn't paved with 
cambric." 
40 
The Three Musketeers 
"Monsieur, you are wrong in trying to humiliate me," said d'Artagnan, 
whose quarrelsome nature was beginning to speak louder than his 
peaceable resolutions. "I'm from Gascony, it's true, and since you know 
that, I needn't tell you that Gascons are not very forbearing; so that, when 
they've excused themselves once, even for some stupidity, they are 
convinced that they've already done half more than they ought." 
"Monsieur, what I said to you," replied Aramis, "was not said in order 
to pick a quarrel with you. Thank God, I'm not a swordslinger, and being 
only an interim musketeer, I never fight unless I'm forced to, and always 
with great reluctance; but this time the matter is serious, for a lady has 
been compromised by you." 
"By us, that is," cried d'Artagnan. 
"Why did you have the tactlessness to give me back the handkerchief?" 
"Why did you have the tactlessness to drop it?" 
"I said, and I repeat, Monsieur, that this handkerchief did not come 
from my pocket." 
"Well, then, you've lied twice, Monsieur, for I myself saw it fall!" 
"Ah! so you take it in that tone, Monsieur le Gascon! Well, then, I'll 
teach you how to live." 
"And I will send you back to your mass, Monsieur l'Abbé! Draw, if you 
please, here and now." 
"No, if you please, my fine friend; no, not here, at least. Don't you see 
that we're in front of the hôtel d'Aiguillon, which is full of the cardinal's 
creatures? Who will tell me that it wasn't His Eminence who charged you 
to fetch my head? Now, I'm ridiculously attached to my head, seeing that it 
seems to go rather well with my shoulders. I'll kill you, rest assured, but 
kill you quite calmly, in a closed and covered place, where you won't be 
able to boast of your death to anyone." 
"I gladly accept, but don't be too sure of it, and take your handkerchief, 
whether it belongs to you or not; you may have occasion to use it." 
"Monsieur is a Gascon?" asked Aramis. 
"Yes. Monsieur is not putting off the meeting out of prudence?" 
"Prudence, Monsieur, is a rather useless virtue for musketeers, I know, 
but indispensable to men of the Church, and as I am a musketeer only 
provisionally, I intend to remain prudent. At two o'clock I shall have the 
honor of awaiting you at the hôtel of M. de Tréville. There I shall point out 
the suitable places to you." 
41 
V: The King's Musketeers and the Cardinal's Guards  
The two young men bowed to each other, then Aramis went off up the 
street that leads to the Luxembourg, while d'Artagnan, seeing that time 
was passing, took the road to the Carmes-Deschaux, saying to himself: 
"Decidedly, I won't survive; but if I'm killed, at least I'll be killed by a 
musketeer." 
V: The King's Musketeers and the Cardinal's Guards 
D'Artagnan knew no one in Paris. So he went to meet Athos without 
bringing a second, resolved to content himself with those chosen by his 
adversary. Besides, it was his definite intention to make the brave 
musketeer all suitable apologies, but without weakness, fearing that the 
result of the duel would be what is always the most regrettable result in an 
affair of this kind, when a young and vigorous man fights against a 
wounded and weakened adversary: vanquished, he doubles the triumph of 
his antagonist; victorious, he is accused of treachery and easy audacity. 
Moreover, either we have poorly introduced the character of our 
adventure seeker, or our reader must already have noticed that he was by 
no means an ordinary man. And so, while repeating to himself that his 
death was inevitable, he was not at all resigned to dying meekly, as another 
man less courageous and less reasonable than he would have been in his 
place. He hoped, thanks to the honest excuses he had saved up for him, to 
make a friend of Athos, whose lordly air and austere appearance pleased 
him greatly. He flattered himself that he might frighten Porthos with the 
adventure of the baldric, which, if he was not killed at once, he could tell 
to everyone, a story which, skillfully brought to full effect, should cover 
Porthos with ridicule. Finally, as for the sly Aramis, he was not much afraid 
of him, and, supposing that he got to him, he undertook to dispatch him 
well and good, or at least to strike him on the face, as Caesar 
recommended doing to Pompey's soldiers,36 thus spoiling forever that 
beauty he was so proud of. 
Furthermore, there was in d'Artagnan that unshakable supply of 
resolution which his father's advice had deposited in his heart, advice the 
substance of which was: "Suffer nothing from anyone except the king, the 
cardinal, and M. de Tréville." Thus he rather flew than walked to the 
convent of the Carmes Déchaussés, or Deschaux, as they said at that time, 
a sort of windowless building bordered by barren fields, a subsidiary of the 
42 
The Three Musketeers 
Pré-aux-clercs,37 and which commonly served for the encounters of men 
who had no time to lose. 
When d'Artagnan came in view of the little wasteland that lay at the 
foot of the monastery, Athos had been waiting for only five minutes, and it 
was striking noon. He was thus as punctual as the Samaritaine,38 and the 
most rigorous casuist with regard to duels had nothing to say. 
Athos, who was still suffering cruelly from his wound, though it had 
been newly bandaged by M. de Tréville's sur-geon, was sitting on a post 
and awaiting his adversary with that peaceful countenance and dignified 
air which never left him. At the sight of d'Artagnan, he stood up and 
politely took a few steps towards him. The latter, for his part, approached 
his adversary not otherwise than with his hat in his hand and its plume 
dragging on the ground. 
"Monsieur," said Athos, "I have informed two of my friends who will 
serve me as seconds, but these two friends have not yet arrived. I'm 
surprised that they are late: it is not their habit." 
"I myself have no seconds, Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "for, having 
come to Paris only yesterday, I know no one here as yet except M. de 
Tréville, to whom I was recommended by my father, who has the honor to 
be something of a friend of his." 
Athos reflected for a moment. 
"You know only M. de Tréville?" he asked. 
"Yes, Monsieur, I know only him." 
"Ah, but that..." Athos went on, speaking half to himself and half to 
d'Artagnan, "but if I kill you, I'll look like a child eater!" 
"Not so much, Monsieur," replied d'Artagnan with a bow that was not 
lacking in dignity, "not so much, since you do me the honor of drawing 
with a wound that must be a great hindrance to you." 
"A great hindrance, on my word, and you caused me the devil's own 
pain, I must say; but I'll use my left hand, as is my habit in such 
circumstances. Don't think I'm doing you a kindness; I draw just as well 
with both hands; and there will even be a disadvantage for you: a left
handed man is very troublesome for people who are not forewarned. I 
regret not having informed you of this circumstance earlier." 
"Truly, Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, inclining once more, "you are of a 
courtesy for which I could not be more grateful." 
43 
V: The King's Musketeers and the Cardinal's Guards  
"You embarrass me," replied Athos with his gentlemanly air. "Let's 
speak of something else, I beg you, unless you find it disagreeable. Ah, 
sangbleu, you really hurt me! My shoulder's on fire!" 
"If you would permit..." d'Artagnan said timidly. 
"What, Monsieur?" 
"I have a miraculous balm for wounds, a balm that comes to me from 
my mother, and which I have tried myself.” 
"Well, then?" 
"Well, then! I'm sure that in less than three days this balm will cure 
you, and at the end of three days, when you're cured, well, then, Monsieur, 
it will still be a great honor for me to be your man." 
D'Artagnan spoke these words with a simplicity that did honor to his 
courtesy without damaging his courage in any way. 
"Pardieu, Monsieur," said Athos, "there's a proposition that pleases 
me—not that I accept it, but it smells of its gentleman a league away. It 
was thus that valiant knights spoke and acted in the time of Charlemagne, 
upon whom every cavalier must seek to model himself. Unfortunately, we 
are no longer in the time of the great emperor. We are in the time of M. le 
cardinal, and three days from now it will be known, however well the 
secret is kept, it will be known that we are going to fight, and our combat 
will be opposed. Ah! but will those meanderers never come?" 
"If you're in a hurry, Monsieur," d'Artagnan said to Athos with the 
same simplicity with which, a moment before, he had suggested putting 
off the duel for three days, "if you're in a hurry, and you'd prefer to 
dispatch me at once, please go ahead." 
"There's another word that pleases me," said Athos, nodding gracefully 
to d'Artagnan. "It hardly speaks for a witless man, and certainly speaks for 
a man of courage. Monsieur, I like men of your temper, and I see that, if we 
don't kill each other, I will afterwards take real pleasure in your 
conversation. Let us wait for these gentlemen, I beg you. I have plenty of 
time, and it will be more correct. Ah, here's one of them, I believe." 
Indeed, at the end of the rue de Vaugirard the gigantic Porthos began 
to appear. 
"What!" cried d'Artagnan. "Your first witness is M. Porthos?" 
"Yes, do you object?" 
"No, not at all." 
"And here is the second." 
44 
The Three Musketeers 
D'Artagnan turned to where Athos was pointing and recognized 
Aramis. 
"What!" he cried with still more astonishment than the first time. 
"Your second witness is M. Aramis?" 
"You are doubtless unaware that one of us is never seen without the 
others, and that we are known among the musketeers and the guards, at 
court and in town, as Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, or the three 
inseparables. However, as you come from Dax or Pau ..." 
"Tarbes," said d'Artagnan. 
"... your ignorance of that detail is permissible," said Athos. 
"By heaven," said d'Artagnan, "you are well named, gentlemen, and my 
adventure, if it causes some stir, will prove at least that your union is not 
based on contrasts." 
Meanwhile, Porthos had come up and greeted Athos with a wave of the 
hand; then, turning to d'Artagnan, he stopped in utter amazement. 
Let us mention in passing that he had changed his baldric and taken 
off his cloak. 
"Aha!" he said, "what's this?" 
"This is the gentleman I am to fight with," said Athos, indicating 
d'Artagnan with his hand and greeting him with the same gesture. 
"I am to fight with him, too," said Porthos. 
"But not until one o'clock," said d'Artagnan. 
"And I, too, am to fight with the gentleman," said Aramis, arriving on 
the scene in his turn. 
"But not until two o'clock," d'Artagnan said with the same calm. 
"But what are you fighting about, Athos?" 
"By heaven, I don't quite know, he hurt my shoulder. And you, 
Porthos?" 
"By heaven, I'm fighting because I'm fighting," Porthos replied, 
blushing. 
Athos, who missed nothing, saw a slight smile pass over the Gascon's 
lips. 
"We had a discussion about clothes," said the young man. 
"And you, Aramis?" asked Athos. 
"Me? I'm fighting for reasons of theology," replied Aramis, making a 
sign to d'Artagnan that he begged him to keep the cause of his duel secret. 
Athos saw a second smile pass over d'Artagnan's lips. 
"Indeed," said Athos. 
45 
V: The King's Musketeers and the Cardinal's Guards  
"Yes, a point in St. Augustine on which we disagree," said the Gascon. 
"He's decidedly a witty man," murmured Athos. 
"And now that you're all together, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "allow 
me to make you my apologies." 
At the word "apologies," a cloud darkened Athos's brow, a haughty 
smile flitted over Porthos's lips, and Aramis responded with a negative 
gesture. 
"You misunderstand me, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, raising his head, 
on which a ray of sunlight played at that moment, gilding its fine and bold 
features. "I apologize to you in case I cannot pay my debt to all three of 
you, for M. Athos has the right to kill me first, which takes away much of 
the value of your claim, M. Porthos, and renders yours virtually null, M. 
Aramis. And now, gentlemen, I repeat to you my apologies, but only for 
that, and—on guard!" 
At these words, with the most gallant gesture one could ever see, 
d'Artagnan drew his sword. 
The blood had risen to d'Artagnan's head, and at that moment he 
would have drawn his sword against all the musketeers in the realm as he 
had just done against Athos, Porthos, and Aramis. 
It was a quarter past noon. The sun was at its zenith, and the place 
chosen as the theater for the duel was exposed to its full ardor. 
"It's very hot," said Athos, drawing his sword in his turn, "but I'm 
unable to take off my doublet; for just now I felt my wound bleeding again, 
and I'm afraid I may hamper the gentleman by showing him blood that he 
has not drawn from me himself." 
"That's true, Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "and whether drawn by 
another or by myself, I assure you that I will always greatly regret to see 
the blood of so brave a gentleman. I will therefore fight in my doublet like 
you." 
"Come, come," said Porthos, "enough of such compliments. Remember 
we're waiting our turn." 
"Speak for yourself, Porthos, if you want to make such unseemly 
remarks," interrupted Aramis. "As for me, I find what they are saying to 
each other very well said and entirely worthy of two gentlemen." 
"Whenever you like, Monsieur," said Athos, putting himself on guard. 
"I was awaiting your orders," said d'Artagnan, crossing his blade. 
46 
The Three Musketeers 
But the two rapiers had barely rung on touching when a squadron of 
His Eminence's guards, commanded by M. de Jussac, appeared around the 
corner of the convent. 
"The cardinal's guards!" Porthos and Aramis cried out together. "Put up 
your swords, gentlemen! Put up your swords!" 
But it was too late. The two combatants had been seen in a posture 
that left no doubt of their intentions. 
"Ho, there!" cried Jussac, advancing towards them and making a sign to 
his men to do as much. "Ho, there, musketeers! So you're fighting here? 
And the edicts? What about them?" 
"You are very generous, gentlemen of the guards," said Athos, full of 
rancor, for Jussac had been one of the aggressors the night before. "If we 
saw you fighting, I promise you, we'd keep from interfering. Leave us 
alone, then, and you'll enjoy yourselves without going to any trouble." 
"Gentlemen," said Jussac, "with great regret I must inform you that the 
thing is impossible. Duty above all. Put up your swords, if you please, and 
follow us." 
"Monsieur," said Aramis, parodying Jussac, "it would be a great 
pleasure for us to obey your gracious invitation, if it depended on us; but 
unfortunately the thing is impossible: M. de Tréville has forbidden it. Go 
your ways, then; that's the best thing you can do." 
This mockery exasperated Jussac. 
"We shall charge you then," he said, "if you disobey." 
"There are five of them," Athos said in a low voice, "and only three of 
us. We'll be beaten again, and we'd better die here, for I declare I will not 
reappear in defeat before the captain.” 
Then Porthos and Aramis instantly closed ranks with him, while Jussac 
lined up his soldiers. 
That single moment sufficed for d'Artagnan to choose sides: this was 
one of those events that determine a man's life; it was a choice between the 
king and the cardinal; once made, it had to be persevered in. To fight, that 
is, to disobey the law, that is, to risk one's head, that is, to make at one 
stroke an enemy of a minister more powerful than the king himself: that 
was what the young man foresaw, and, be it said in his praise, he did not 
hesitate a second. Turning to Athos and his friends, he said: 
"Gentlemen, if I may, I shall revise your words somewhat. You said 
there were only three of you, but it seems to me that we are four." 
"But you're not one of us," said Porthos. 
47 
V: The King's Musketeers and the Cardinal's Guards  
"That's true," replied d'Artagnan, "I don't have the clothes, but I have 
the soul. My heart is a musketeer's; I feel it very well, Monsieur, and that 
leads me on." 
"Get out of the way, young man," cried Jussac, who had undoubtedly 
guessed d'Artagnan's intentions by his gestures and the expression of his 
face. "You can leave; we give our consent. Save your skin; go quickly." 
D'Artagnan did not budge. 
"You're decidedly a fine lad," said Athos, shaking the young man's 
hand. 
"Well, make your choice!" cried Jussac. 
"Come on," said Porthos and Aramis, "let's do something." 
"Monsieur is full of generosity," said Athos. 
But all three were thinking of d'Artagnan's youth and were fearful of 
his inexperience. 
"There will be just three of us, one wounded, plus a boy," said Athos, 
"and all the same they'll say we were four men." 
"Yes, but to back out!" said Porthos. 
"It's difficult," replied Athos. 
D'Artagnan understood their indecision. 
"Gentlemen, try me anyway," he said, "and I swear to you on my honor 
that I will not leave here if we're defeated." 
"What's your name, my brave lad?" asked Athos. 
"D'Artagnan, sir." 
"Well, then! Athos, Porthos, Aramis, and d'Artagnan, forward!" cried 
Athos. 
"Well, gentlemen, have you decided to decide?" Jussac cried for the 
third time. 
"We have, gentlemen," said Athos. 
"And what is your choice?" asked Jussac. 
"We shall have the honor of charging you," replied Aramis, raising his 
hat with one hand and drawing his sword with the other. 
"Ah! so you resist!" cried Jussac. 
"Sangdieu! does that surprise you?" 
And the nine combatants rushed at each other with a fury that did not 
exclude a certain method. 
Athos took a certain Cahusac, a favorite of the cardinal; Porthos had 
Biscarat,39 and Aramis was faced with two adversaries. 
As for d'Artagnan, he found himself up against Jussac himself. 
48 
The Three Musketeers 
The young Gascon's heart beat as though it would burst his chest—not 
from fear, thank God! there was not a shadow of it in him, but from 
emulation. He fought like an enraged tiger, circling ten times around his 
adversary, and twenty times changing his guard and his ground. Jussac 
was, as they said then, partial to the blade, and had a great deal of 
experience; however, he had all the trouble in the world defending himself 
against an adversary who, leaping and agile, deviated from the received 
rules every moment, attacking from all sides at once, and all the while 
parrying like a man who has the greatest respect for his own epidermis. 
This struggle finally ended by exasperating Jussac. Furious at being 
kept in check by someone he had considered a mere boy, he became 
excited and started making mistakes. D'Artagnan, who, though lacking in 
practice, had a profound theory, redoubled his agility. Jussac, wishing to 
end it, aimed a terrible blow at his adversary, lunging full length; but the 
latter parried in prime, and while Jussac was straightening up, slipped 
under his blade like a snake and ran him through. Jussac collapsed in a 
heap. 
D'Artagnan then cast a quick and worried glance over the battlefield. 
Aramis had already killed one of his adversaries, but the other was 
pressing him hotly. However, Aramis was in a good position and could still 
defend himself. 
Biscarat and Porthos had just scored a double hit: Porthos had received 
a sword stroke through the arm, and Biscarat through the thigh. But as 
neither wound was serious, they went at it all the more fiercely. 
Athos, wounded anew by Cahusac, turned visibly pale, but did not 
yield an inch: he only changed sword hands and now fought with his left. 
D'Artagnan, according to the laws of dueling of that time, could help 
someone. While he was trying to see which of his companions needed his 
aid, he caught a glance from Athos. That glance was of a sublime 
eloquence. Athos would have died rather than call for help, but he could 
look, and with his look ask for assistance. D'Artagnan guessed it, made a 
terrible leap, and landed beside Cahusac, crying: 
"Face me, Monsieur le garde, I'm going to kill you!" 
Cahusac turned; it was just in time. Athos, whose extreme courage was 
all that sustained him, dropped to one knee. 
"Sangdieu!" he cried to d'Artagnan, "don't kill him, young man, I beg 
you; I have an old matter to settle with him, when I'm healed and fit again. 
Just disarm him, wrench his sword away. That's it. Good! Very good!" 
49 
V: The King's Musketeers and the Cardinal's Guards  
This exclamation was torn from Athos by Cahusac's sword, which 
landed twenty paces from him. D'Artagnan and Cahusac both rushed, the 
one to pick it up again, the other to take it away; but d'Artagnan, the more 
nimble, got there first and placed his foot on it. 
Cahusac ran to the guard Aramis had killed, took his rapier, and was 
returning to d'Artagnan; but on his way he met Athos, who had caught his 
breath during the moment's pause that d'Artagnan had procured him, and 
who, for fear d'Artagnan might kill his enemy for him, wanted to take up 
the fight again. 
D'Artagnan understood that it would be offensive to Athos not to let 
him do so. Indeed, a few seconds later Cahusac fell, his throat run through 
by the stroke of a sword. 
At the same moment, Aramis pressed his sword to the chest of his 
fallen adversary and forced him to beg for mercy. 
There remained Porthos and Biscarat. Porthos produced a thousand 
fanfaronades, asking Biscarat what time it might be, and complimenting 
him on the company his brother had just obtained in the regiment of 
Navarre. But his mockery gained him nothing. Biscarat was one of those 
men of iron who only fall when dead. 
However, it had to end. The watch might come and seize all the 
combatants, wounded or not, royalists or cardinalists. Athos, Aramis, and 
d'Artagnan surrounded Biscarat and called on him to surrender. Though 
alone against them all, and with a sword stroke through the thigh, Biscarat 
wanted to hold out; but Jussac, who had raised himself on one elbow, 
called on him to surrender. Biscarat was a Gascon like d'Artagnan; he 
turned a deaf ear and contented himself with laughing, and between two 
parries, finding time to point out a place on the ground with the tip of his 
sword, he said, parodying a verse from the Bible: 
"Here dies Biscarat, alone of those who are with him." 
"But you've got four men against you; end it, I order you." 
"Ah! if you order it, that's another thing," said Biscarat. "Since you're 
my commander, I must obey." 
And, leaping back, he broke his sword over his knee, so as not to 
surrender it, threw the pieces over the convent wall, and crossed his arms, 
whistling a cardinalist tune. 
Bravery is always respected, even in an enemy. The musketeers saluted 
Biscarat with their swords and put them back in their scabbards. 
D'Artagnan did the same; then, aided by Biscarat, the only one left 
50 
The Three Musketeers 
standing, he carried Jussac, Cahusac, and the one of Aramis's adversaries 
who was merely wounded, under the porch of the convent. The fourth, as 
we have said, was dead. Then they rang the bell, and, taking four of the five 
swords, went off drunk with joy to the hôtel of M. de Tréville. 
They were seen arm in arm, taking up the whole width of the street, 
and accosting every musketeer they met, so that in the end they formed a 
triumphal march. D'Artagnan's heart was drunk to overflowing; he walked 
between Athos and Porthos, clutching them tenderly. 
"If I'm not yet a musketeer," he said to his new friends, as they went 
through the door to the hôtel of M. de Tréville, "at least I've been accepted 
as an apprentice, haven't I?" 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth 
The affair caused a big stir. M. de Tréville scolded his musketeers a 
great deal aloud, and congratulated them quietly; but, as there was no time 
to lose in warning the king, M. de Tréville hastened to the Louvre. It was 
already too late, the king was locked in with the cardinal, and M. de 
Tréville was told that the king was working and could not receive at the 
moment. That evening, M. de Tréville went to the king's games. The king 
was winning, and as he was quite miserly, he was in excellent humor. And 
so, catching sight of M. de Tréville from afar, he said: 
"Come here, Monsieur le capitaine, come and let me scold you. Do you 
know that His Eminence came to complain to me about your musketeers, 
and with such emotion that His Eminence is sick from it this evening? Ah, 
but what daredevils, what gallows birds your musketeers are!" 
"No, Sire," replied Tréville, who saw at first glance how things would 
turn out, "no, on the contrary, they're good creatures, gentle as lambs, and 
have only one desire, I guarantee it: it is that their swords never leave the 
scabbard except in Your Majesty's service. But, what can you do? M. le 
cardinal's guards are constantly picking quarrels with them, and for the 
very honor of the corps, the poor young men are obliged to defend 
themselves." 
"Listen to M. de Tréville," said the king, "listen to him! You'd think he 
was talking about a religious community! Truly, my dear captain, I'd like to 
take your commission and give it to Mlle de Chemerault,40 to whom I've 
promised an abbey. But don't think I'll take you at your word. I'm known 
as Louis the Just, M. de Tréville, and we shall see, we shall soon see." 
51 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
"Ah! it's because I trust in that justice, Sire, that I patiently and calmly 
await Your Majesty's good pleasure." 
"Wait, then, Monsieur, wait," said the king. "I won't make you wait 
long." 
Indeed, the luck turned, and as the king began losing what he had 
won, he was not sorry to play—allow us this gambler's expression, of 
which, we admit, we do not know the origin— he was not sorry to play 
Charlemagne.41 The king thus stood up after a moment, and pocketing the 
money that was in front of him, the major part of which represented his 
winnings, said: 
"La Vieuville,42 take my place, I must speak with M. de Tréville about 
an important matter. Ah! ... I had eighty louis in front of me; put down the 
same amount, so that those who have lost won't have any reason to 
complain. Justice before all." 
Then, turning to M. de Tréville and walking with him toward the 
embrasure of a window, he went on: 
"Well, Monsieur, so you say it was the guards of the Most Eminent who 
picked a quarrel with your musketeers?" 
"Yes, Sire, as always." 
"And how did the thing come about, eh? For you know, my dear 
captain, a judge must hear both sides." 
"Ah, my God, in the simplest and most natural way possible! Three of 
my best soldiers, whom Your Majesty knows by name and whose devotion 
you have more than once appreciated, and who, I may affirm it to the king, 
take his service greatly to heart—three of my best soldiers, I say, MM. 
Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, went for an outing with a young lad from 
Gascony whom I had introduced to them that same morning. The outing 
was to be in Saint-Germain,43 I believe, and they had agreed to meet at the 
Carmes-Deschaux, where they were disturbed by M. de Jussac, MM. 
Cahusac and Biscarat, and two other guards, who surely did not come 
there in so numerous a company without bad intentions against the 
edicts." 
"Aha! you've just made me think of it," said the king. "No doubt they 
came to fight themselves." 
"I do not accuse them, Sire, but I let Your Majesty consider what five 
armed men could be up to in such a deserted place as the environs of the 
Carmelite convent.” 
"Yes, you're right, Tréville, you're right." 
52 
The Three Musketeers 
"So, when they saw my musketeers, they changed their minds and 
forgot their private hatred of the corps; for Your Majesty is not unaware 
that the musketeers, who are the king's and only the king's, are the natural 
enemies of the guards, who are M. le cardinal's men." 
"Yes, Tréville, yes," the king said melancholically, "and it's very sad, 
believe me, to see two parties like this in France, two heads to the royalty; 
but that will all end, Tréville, that will all end. So you say the guards picked 
a quarrel with the musketeers?" 
"I say it's possible that things went that way, but I can't swear to it, 
Sire. You know how difficult it is to learn the truth, and unless one is gifted 
with that admirable instinct which gave the name 'Just' to Louis XIII..." 
"And right you are, Tréville; but they weren't alone, your musketeers, 
didn't they have a boy with them?" 
"Yes, Sire, and a wounded man, so that three of the king's musketeers, 
one of them wounded, and a boy not only held their own against five of M. 
le cardinal's most terrible guards, but brought four of them down." 
"Why, that's a victory!" the king cried, beaming. "A total victory!" 
"Yes, Sire, as total as at the pont de Cé."44 
"Four men, one of them wounded, and one a boy, you say?" 
"Barely a young man, who even bore himself so perfectly on this 
occasion that I will take the liberty of recommending him to Your 
Majesty." 
"What's his name?" 
"D'Artagnan, Sire. He's the son of one of my oldest friends; the son of a 
man who was in the partisan wars with the king, your father, of glorious 
memory.” 
"And you say he bore himself well, this young man? Tell me about it, 
Tréville; you know how I love stories of war and combat." 
And King Louis XIII put one hand on his hip and with the other 
proudly twirled his mustache. 
"Sire," Tréville picked up, "as I told you, M. d'Artagnan is almost a boy, 
and as he does not have the honor of being a musketeer, he was in civilian 
dress. M. le cardinal's guards, perceiving his extreme youth and, what's 
more, that he was a stranger to the corps, invited him to withdraw before 
they attacked." 
"So you see, Tréville," the king interrupted, "it was they who attacked." 
53 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
"That's right, Sire, there's no further doubt. So they called on him to 
withdraw, but he replied that he was a musketeer at heart and all for His 
Majesty, and that he would remain with the gentlemen musketeers." 
"Brave young man!" murmured the king. 
"Indeed, he did remain with them; and Your Majesty has so firm a 
champion in him that it was he who gave Jussac that terrible stroke of the 
sword which so greatly angers M. le cardinal." 
"It was he who wounded Jussac?" cried the king. "He, a mere boy? 
That's impossible, Tréville!" 
"It is as I have the honor of telling Your Majesty." 
"Jussac? One of the best blades in the realm?" 
"Well, then, Sire, he has met his master." 
"I want to see this young man, Tréville. I want to see him, and if 
something can be done, well, then we shall take care of it." 
"When would Your Majesty deign to receive him?" 
"Tomorrow at noon, Tréville." 
"Shall I bring him alone?" 
"No, bring me all four of them. I want to thank them all at the same 
time. Devoted men are rare, Tréville, and devotion must be rewarded." 
"At noon, Sire, we shall be at the Louvre." 
"Ah! by the back stairs, Tréville, by the back stairs. There's no use in 
the cardinal's knowing ..." 
"Yes, Sire." 
"You understand, Tréville, an edict is an edict; fighting is forbidden, 
when all's said." 
"But this encounter, Sire, lies completely outside the ordinary 
conditions of a duel: it was a brawl, and the proof is that there were five of 
the cardinal's guards against my three musketeers and M. d'Artagnan." 
"That's right," said the king, "but never mind, Tréville, still come by the 
back stairs." 
Tréville smiled. But since it was already a great deal for him to have 
made this child revolt against his master, he bowed respectfully to the 
king, and with his permission took leave of him. 
That same evening, the three musketeers were informed of the honor 
that had been accorded them. As they had known the king for a long time, 
they were not too excited; but d'Artagnan, with his Gascon imagination, 
saw in it his approaching good fortune, and spent the night in golden 
dreams. By eight o'clock in the morning, he was at Athos's place. 
54 
The Three Musketeers 
D'Artagnan found the musketeer dressed and ready to go out. As their 
meeting with the king was only at noon, he had made plans with Porthos 
and Aramis to go and play tennis at a sporting house near the Luxembourg 
stables. Athos invited d'Artagnan to go with them, and despite his 
ignorance of the game, which he had never played, he accepted, not 
knowing what else to do with his time from barely nine in the morning till 
noon. 
The two musketeers had already arrived and were batting the ball 
around. Athos, who was very good at all physical exercises, went with 
d'Artagnan to the other side and challenged them. But with the first 
movement he made, though he was playing with his left hand, he 
understood that his wound was still too recent to allow him such exercise. 
D'Artagnan thus remained alone, and as he declared that he was too 
clumsy to keep up a regulation game, they simply went on hitting balls 
back and forth without counting points. But one of these balls, sped by the 
herculean fist of Porthos, came so close to d'Artagnan's face that he 
thought if, instead of passing by, it had gone right into it, his audience 
would probably have been ruined, seeing that it would have been quite 
impossible for him to present himself to the king. Now, since his whole 
future, in his Gascon imagination, depended on that audience, he politely 
saluted Porthos and Aramis, declaring that he would not take up the game 
again until he could hold his own, and went to take a seat in the gallery 
close to the rope. 
Unfortunately for d'Artagnan, among the spectators there happened to 
be one of His Eminence's guards, who, still all fired up by the defeat of his 
companions only the day before, had promised himself to seize the first 
occasion to avenge it. He now thought the occasion had come, and turning 
to his neighbor, said: 
"It's not surprising that this young man is afraid of a ball, no doubt he's 
an apprentice musketeer." 
D'Artagnan whipped around as if stung by a serpent and stared fixedly 
at the guard who had just made this insolent remark. 
"Pardieu!" the latter picked up, insolently twirling his mustache, "look 
at me as much as you like, my little sir, I said what I said." 
"And since what you said is too clear for your words to need any 
explanation," d'Artagnan replied in a low voice, "I will ask you to come 
with me." 
"And when might that be?" the guard asked with the same mocking air. 
55 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
"At once, if you please." 
"And I suppose you know who I am?" 
"I have no idea, and it doesn't worry me in the least." 
"You're wrong there, for if you knew my name, you might be in less of a 
hurry.” 
"What is your name?" 
"Bernajoux, at your service." 
"Well, then, M. Bernajoux," d'Artagnan said calmly, "I'll be waiting for 
you at the door." 
"Go on, Monsieur, I'm right behind you." 
"Don't be in too much of a hurry, Monsieur; they shouldn't see us 
leaving together. You understand that, for what we're about to do, too big 
a crowd would be a hindrance." 
"Very well," replied the guard, surprised that his name had no effect on 
the young man. 
Indeed, Bernajoux's name was known to everyone, with the sole 
exception of d'Artagnan, perhaps, for he was one of those who figured 
most often in the daily brawls that all the edicts of king and cardinal had 
been unable to curb. 
Porthos and Aramis were so caught up in their game, and Athos was 
watching them with such attention, that they did not even see their young 
companion leave. He stopped at the door, as he had said to His Eminence's 
guard. A moment later, the man came down in his turn. As d'Artagnan had 
no time to lose, seeing that the audience with the king was fixed for noon, 
he cast a glance around him, and seeing that the street was deserted, said 
to his adversary: 
"By heaven, it's a lucky thing for you, though your name is Bernajoux, 
that you only have to do with an apprentice musketeer. Don't worry, 
however, I'll do my best. On guard!" 
"But," the man thus provoked by d'Artagnan said, "it seems to me the 
place is rather ill chosen. We'd be better off behind the abbey of Saint
Germain or in the Pré-aux-clercs." 
"What you say is quite sensible," replied d'Artagnan. "Unfortunately, I 
have little time, because I have an appointment at noon. On guard then, 
Monsieur, on guard!" 
Bernajoux was not a man to have such a compliment repeated to him 
twice. At the same instant his sword flashed in his hand, and he fell upon 
his adversary, whom, owing to his extreme youth, he hoped to intimidate. 
56 
The Three Musketeers 
But d'Artagnan had served his apprenticeship the day before, and, 
freshly graduated from his victory, filled with his future favor, he was 
resolved not to yield a step: the two blades thus found themselves engaged 
to the hilt, and as d'Artagnan firmly stood his ground, it was his adversary 
who stepped back. But d'Artagnan seized the moment when, in that 
movement, Bernajoux's blade deviated from the line, disengaged, lunged, 
and wounded his adversary in the shoulder. D'Artagnan at once took a step 
back in his turn and raised his sword, but Bernajoux cried to him that it 
was nothing and, lunging blindly at him, impaled himself. However, as he 
did not fall, as he did not declare himself defeated, but only backed away 
towards the hôtel of M. de La Trémouille,45 where one of his relations was 
in service, d'Artagnan, unaware of the gravity of the last wound his 
adversary had received, pressed him hotly, and would no doubt have 
finished him off with a third stroke, when, the rumor in the street having 
reached the tennis court, two of the guard's friends, who had heard him 
exchange a few words with d'Artagnan and had seen him leave after those 
words, rushed sword in hand out of the sporting house and fell upon the 
victor. But Athos, Porthos, and Aramis appeared at once in their turn, and 
just as the two guards were attacking their young friend, forced them to 
turn around. At that moment, Bernajoux fell; and as the guards were only 
two against four, they started shouting: "To us, hôtel de La Trémouille!" At 
those shouts, everything that was in the hôtel came out and hurled itself 
upon the four companions, who for their part began shouting: "To us, 
musketeers!" 
This cry was ordinarily heeded, for the musketeers were known 
enemies of His Eminence, and they were loved for the hatred they bore the 
cardinal. And so the guards from other companies than those belonging to 
the red duke, as Aramis had called him, generally took the side of the 
king's musketeers in these sorts of quarrels. Of three guards from the 
company of M. des Essarts,46 who were passing by, two went to the aid of 
the four companions, while the third ran to the hôtel of M. de Tréville, 
crying: "To us, musketeers, to us!" As usual, the hotel of M, de Tréville was 
filled with the bearers of that arm, who went running to help their 
comrades. The mêlée became general, but the musketeers were the 
stronger. The cardinal's guards and M. de La Trémouille's people withdrew 
into the hôtel, where they shut the doors just in time to keep their enemies 
from bursting in along with them. As for the wounded man, he had been 
carried off at the start and, as we have said, was in a very bad state. 
57 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
The excitement was at its peak among the musketeers and their allies, 
and they were debating whether to punish the insolence of M. de La 
Trémouille's servants for making a sortie against the king's musketeers by 
setting fire to his hôtel. The proposition had been made and greeted with 
enthusiasm, when fortunately the clock struck eleven. D'Artagnan and his 
companions remembered their audience, and as they would have been 
sorry to see such a fine coup brought off without them, they began to calm 
things down. Men contented themselves with throwing a few cobblestones 
at the doors, but the doors held. Then they wearied of it. Besides, those 
who had to be regarded as the leaders of the enterprise had just left the 
group and set off for the hôtel of M. de Tréville, who was waiting for them, 
already informed of the escapade. 
"Quick, to the Louvre," he said, "to the Louvre without a moment's 
loss, and let's try to see the king before the cardinal alerts him. We'll tell 
him the thing was a follow-up of yesterday's affair, and the two will go by 
together." 
M. de Tréville, accompanied by the four young men, set out for the 
Louvre. But, to the great amazement of the captain of the musketeers, it 
was announced to him that the king had gone stag hunting in the forest of 
Saint-Germain.47 M. de Tréville made them repeat this news twice, and 
each time his companions saw his face darken. 
"Had His Majesty already planned this hunt as of yesterday?" he asked. 
"No, Your Excellency," replied the valet, "the king's master of hounds 
came this morning to announce that they had rounded up a stag for him 
last night. He replied at first that he would not go, but then was unable to 
resist the pleasure that the hunt promised and left after dinner.” 
"And did the king see the cardinal?" asked M. de Tréville. 
"In all probability," replied the valet, "for I saw His Eminence's horses 
being hitched up this morning, and when I asked where he was going, I 
was told: 'To Saint-Germain.' " 
"We've been forestalled," said M. de Tréville. "Gentlemen, I will see the 
king this evening; but as for you, I don't advise you to risk it." 
The advice was too reasonable and above all came from a man who 
knew the king too well for the four young men to try struggling against it. 
M. de Tréville invited them to go each to his own home and wait for his 
news. 
On going into his hôtel, M. de Tréville reflected that he ought to steal a 
march by making the first complaint. He sent one of his servants to M. de 
58 
The Three Musketeers 
La Trémouille with a letter in which he begged him to expel M. le 
cardinal's guards from his house and to reprimand his people for having 
the audacity to make a sortie against the musketeers. But M. de La 
Trémouille, already informed by his equerry, who, as we know, was 
Bernajoux's relation, replied to him that it was neither for M. de Tréville 
nor for his musketeers to complain, but, quite the contrary, for him whose 
people had been attacked by the musketeers and whose hôtel they had 
wanted to burn. Now, as the debate between these two lords could have 
lasted a long time, each of them naturally holding stubbornly to his 
opinion, M. de Tréville devised an expedient aimed at ending it all: this 
was to go to see M. de La Trémouille himself. 
So he went at once to his hôtel and had himself announced. 
The two lords greeted each other politely, for, if there was no 
friendship between them, there was at least respect. They were both men 
of courage and of honor; and as M. de La Trémouille, a Protestant, and 
rarely in the king's presence, was of no party, he generally brought no 
prejudice to his social relations. This time, nevertheless, his welcome, 
though polite, was colder than usual. 
"Monsieur," said M. de Tréville, "each of us believes he has a complaint 
against the other, and I have come to you myself so that together we can 
bring this affair to light." 
"Gladly," replied M. de La Trémouille. "But I warn you that I am well 
informed, and the fault lies entirely with your musketeers." 
"Monsieur, you are too just and reasonable a man," said M. de Tréville, 
"not to accept the proposition I am going to make." 
"Make it, Monsieur, I'm listening." 
"How is M. Bernajoux, your equerry's relation?" 
"Why, very bad, Monsieur. Besides the wound he received in the arm, 
which is not especially dangerous, he acquired another that went through 
the lung, about which the doctor has very poor things to say.” 
"But has the wounded man remained conscious?" 
"Perfectly." 
"Can he speak?" 
"With difficulty, but he can." 
"Well, then, Monsieur, let us go to him; let us make him swear by the 
name of God, before whom he is perhaps about to be summoned, to tell 
the truth. I will take him as judge of his own case, Monsieur, and what he 
says, I will believe." 
59 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
M. de La Trémouille reflected a moment; then, as it was difficult to 
make a more reasonable proposition, he accepted. 
They both went down to the room where the wounded man lay. The 
latter, on seeing these two noble lords coming to visit him, attempted to 
raise himself on his bed, but he was too weak, and, exhausted by the effort, 
fell back almost unconscious. 
M. de La Trémouille went up to him and held smelling salts to his 
nose, which brought him back to life. Then M. de Tréville, not wanting 
anyone to be able to say he had influenced the sick man, invited M. de La 
Trémouille to question him himself. 
It happened as M. de Tréville had foreseen. Hovering between life and 
death as Bernajoux was, he never even thought for a moment of concealing 
the truth, and told the two lords everything exactly as it had happened. 
That was all M. de Tréville wanted. He wished Bernajoux a quick 
recovery, took leave of M. de La Trémouille, went back to his hôtel, and 
immediately notified the four friends that he was expecting them for 
dinner. 
M. de Tréville received the very best company—all anti-cardinalist to 
boot. It is understandable, then, that the conversation throughout dinner 
turned to the two defeats His Eminence's guards had just suffered. Now, 
since d'Artagnan had been the hero of both days, it was upon him that 
most of the congratulations fell, and Athos, Porthos, and Aramis 
relinquished them to him not only as good comrades, but as men who had 
had their own turn often enough to let him have his. 
Towards six o'clock, M. de Tréville announced that he had to go to the 
Louvre; but as the hour of the audience granted by His Majesty was past, 
instead of requesting entry by the back stairway, he placed himself with 
the four young men in the antechamber. The king had not yet come back 
from the hunt. Our young men had waited no more than half an hour, 
mingling with the crowd of courtiers, when all the doors were opened and 
His Majesty was announced. 
At that announcement, d'Artagnan felt himself shudder to the marrow 
of his bones. The moment that was to follow would, in all probability, 
determine the rest of his life. And so his eyes were fixed with anxiety on 
the door through which the king would enter. 
Louis XIII came marching in first. He was in hunting dress, still all 
dusty, wearing high boots and holding a crop in his hand. At first glance, 
d'Artagnan judged that the king was in a stormy mood. 
60 
The Three Musketeers 
This disposition, visible as it was in His Majesty, did not keep the 
courtiers from lining up as he passed: in royal antechambers it is better to 
be seen by an irate eye than not to be seen at all. The three musketeers did 
not hesitate, then, and took a step forward, while d'Artagnan, on the 
contrary, stayed hidden behind them. But though the king knew Athos, 
Porthos, and Aramis, he passed in front of them without looking at them, 
without speaking to them, and as if he had never seen them. As for M. de 
Tréville, when the king's eyes rested a moment on him, he endured that 
gaze with such firmness that it was the king who looked away; after which, 
grumbling all the while, the king went to his apartments. 
"Things are going badly," Athos said, smiling. "We won't be made 
knights of the order this time." 
"Wait here for ten minutes," said M. de Tréville, "and if you don't see 
me come out after ten minutes, go back to my hôtel, for it will be useless 
for you to wait for me any longer." 
The four young men waited ten minutes, fifteen minutes, twenty 
minutes; and seeing that M. de Tréville did not reappear, they left, greatly 
worried about what was going to happen. 
M. de Tréville had boldly entered the king's room and had found His 
Majesty in a very foul humor, sitting in an armchair and tapping his boots 
with the handle of his crop. But this had not prevented him from asking 
with great composure for news of his health. 
"Bad, Monsieur, bad," replied the king. "I'm bored." 
This was indeed the worst ailment of Louis XIII, who often took one of 
his courtiers, drew him over to a window, and said: "Monsieur So-and-So, 
let's be bored together." 
"How's that? Your Majesty is bored?" said M. de Tréville. "Then you 
didn't take pleasure in the hunt today?" 
"Fine pleasure, Monsieur! Everything's degenerating, by my soul, and I 
don't know whether the game no longer leaves a trail or the dogs no longer 
have noses. We let loose a ten-point stag, we pursue him for six hours, and 
when he's ready to be taken, when Saint-Simon48 is already putting the 
horn to his lips to blow the mort—bang! the whole pack changes direction 
and takes off after a brocket. It's evident that I shall be obliged to give up 
hunting as I've given up hawking. Ah! I'm a very unhappy king, M. de 
Tréville! I had only one gyrfalcon, and it died the day before yesterday." 
61 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
"Indeed, Sire, I understand your despair, and the misfortune is a great 
one; but it seems to me you still have a good number of falcons, sparrow 
hawks, and tiercels." 
"And not a man to train them. Falconers are disappearing; I'm the only 
one left who knows the art of venery. After me all will be said and done, 
and they'll hunt with pits, snares, and traps. If only I still had time to 
instruct some pupils! But no, there is M. le cardinal, who doesn't give me a 
moment's rest, who talks to me about Spain, talks to me about Austria, 
talks to me about England! Ah! speaking of M. le cardinal, M. de Tréville, I 
am displeased with you." 
M. de Tréville was waiting for the king at this turning. He knew the 
king from long experience; he had understood that all his laments were 
only a preface, a sort of warm-up to encourage himself, and that he had 
finally got where he wanted to go. 
"And in what am I so unfortunate as to have displeased Your Majesty?" 
asked M. de Tréville, feigning the deepest astonishment. 
"Is this how you fulfill your responsibilities, Monsieur?" the king went 
on, without responding directly to M. de Tréville's question. "Is it for this 
that I named you captain of my musketeers, that they should murder a 
man, stir up a whole quarter, and try to burn down Paris without your 
saying a word? However," the king went on, "I am no doubt being hasty in 
accusing you. No doubt the troublemakers are in prison, and you have 
come to inform me that justice has been done." 
"On the contrary, Sire," M. de Tréville replied calmly, "I have come to 
ask you for justice." 
"Against whom?" cried the king. 
"Against slanderers," said M. de Tréville. 
"Ah! here's something new!" the king picked up. "Are you going to tell 
me that your three damned musketeers, Athos, Porthos, and Aramis, and 
your lad from Bearn, didn't throw themselves like madmen on poor 
Bernajoux and mistreat him so badly that he's probably on his way out of 
this world as I speak? Are you going to say that after that they didn't lay 
siege to the hôtel of the duc de La Trémouille, and that they didn't intend 
to burn it? Which would perhaps have been no great misfortune in time of 
war, seeing that it's a nest of Huguenots, but which, in time of peace, is a 
regrettable example. Tell me, are you going to deny all that?" 
"And who told you this fine tale, Sire?" M. de Tréville asked calmly. 
62 
The Three Musketeers 
"Who told me this fine tale, Monsieur? Who else could it be, if not he 
who wakes while I sleep, who works while I amuse myself, who runs 
everything inside and outside the realm, in France as well as in Europe?" 
"His Majesty is doubtless referring to God," said M. de Tréville, "for I 
know of no one but God who could be so far above His Majesty." 
"No, Monsieur, I am referring to the sole support of the state, to my 
only servant, to my only friend—M. le cardinal." 
"His Eminence is not His Holiness, Sire." 
"What do you mean by that, Monsieur?" 
"That only the pope is infallible, and that this infallibility does not 
extend to cardinals." 
"You mean to say he's deceiving me, you mean to say he's betraying 
me? You're accusing him, then. Come, tell me, admit frankly that you're 
accusing him." 
"No, Sire. But I say that he is deceived himself; I say that he has been ill 
informed; I say that he was in haste to accuse Your Majesty's musketeers, 
towards whom he is unjust, and that he has not drawn his information 
from the best sources." 
"The accusation comes from M. de La Trémouille, from the duke 
himself. What do you say to that?" 
"I might say, Sire, that he is too interested in the question to be an 
impartial witness; but beyond that, Sire, I know the duke to be a loyal 
gentleman, and I will defer to him, but on one condition, Sire." 
"Which is?" 
"That Your Majesty have him come, question him, but yourself, one to 
one, without witnesses, and that I see Your Majesty again as soon as you 
have received the duke." 
"Why, yes!" said the king. "And you will defer to what M. de La 
Trémouille says?" 
"Yes, Sire." 
"You will accept his judgment?" 
"Unquestionably.” 
"And you will submit to the reparations he demands?" 
"Completely." 
"La Chesnaye!"49 cried the king. "La Chesnaye!" 
The trusted valet of Louis XIII, who always stood by the door, came in. 
"La Chesnaye," said the king, "send someone this instant to summon 
M. de La Trémouille to me. I wish to speak to him this evening." 
63 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
"Your Majesty gives me his word that he will see no one between M. de 
La Trémouille and myself?" 
"No one, as I'm a gentleman." 
"Till tomorrow, then, Sire." 
"Till tomorrow, Monsieur." 
"At what hour, if it please Your Majesty?" 
"At whatever hour you like." 
"But if I come too early in the morning, I fear I shall awaken Your 
Majesty." 
"Awaken me? Do I ever sleep? I no longer sleep, Monsieur; I dream 
sometimes, that's all. Come as early in the morning as you like, at seven 
o'clock; but woe to you if your musketeers are guilty!" 
"If my musketeers are guilty, Sire, the guilty ones will be handed over 
to Your Majesty, who will deal with them as he sees fit. Does Your Majesty 
require anything else? Speak, I am ready to obey.” 
"No, Monsieur, no, and it's not without reason that they call me Louis 
the Just. Till tomorrow, then, Monsieur, till tomorrow." 
"God keep Your Majesty till then!" 
Little as the king slept, M. de Tréville slept still worse. That same 
evening he sent notice to his three musketeers and their companion to be 
at his place at half-past six in the morning. He brought them with him 
without affirming anything, without promising them anything, and not 
concealing from them that their favor and even his own depended on a 
throw of the dice. 
Coming to the foot of the back stairs, he had them wait. If the king was 
still angry with them, they could go away without being seen; if the king 
consented to receive them, they would only have to be called. 
On entering the king's private antechamber, M. de Tréville found La 
Chesnaye, who informed him that they had not found M. de La Trémouille 
the evening before at his hôtel, that he had come back too late to present 
himself at the Louvre, that he had only just arrived, and that he was even 
now with the king. 
This circumstance pleased M. de Tréville greatly. He was thus certain 
that no foreign suggestion would slip between M. de La Trémouille's 
deposition and himself. 
Indeed, ten minutes had barely passed when the door to the study 
opened and M. de Tréville saw M. de La Trémouille come out. The duke 
came up to him and said: 
64 
The Three Musketeers 
"M. de Tréville, His Majesty just sent to summon me in order to learn 
how things went yesterday morning at my hôtel. I told him the truth, that 
is to say, that the fault was with my people, and that I was ready to make 
you my apologies. Since I find you here, kindly receive them, and always 
hold me as one of your friends." 
"Monsieur le duc," said M. de Tréville, "I was so fully confident of your 
loyalty that I wanted no other defender before His Majesty than yourself. I 
see that I was not mistaken, and I thank you that there is still in France a 
man of whom one can say without being deceived what I said of you." 
"Very well, very well," said the king, who had listened to these 
compliments between the two doors. "Only tell him, Tréville, since he 
claims to be one of your friends, that I would also like to be one of his, but 
he neglects me, that it's three years now since I've seen him, and that I 
never see him except when I send for him. Tell him all that on my behalf, 
for these are things that a king cannot say himself.” 
"Thank you, Sire, thank you," said the duke, "but Your Majesty is well 
aware that it is not those—I am by no means saying this of M. de 
Tréville—it is not those he sees every hour of the day who are most 
devoted to him." 
"Ah! so you heard what I said! So much the better, Duke, so much the 
better," said the king, going to the door. "Ah! it's you, M. de Tréville! 
Where are your musketeers? I told you the day before yesterday to bring 
them to me. Why haven't you done so?" 
"They're downstairs, Sire, and with your leave La Chesnaye will go and 
tell them to come up." 
"Yes, yes, let them come at once; it's nearly eight o'clock, and at nine I 
expect a visit. Go, M. le duc, and above all come back. This way, Tréville." 
The duke bowed and left. Just as he opened the door, the three 
musketeers and d'Artagnan, escorted by La Chesnaye, appeared at the 
head of the stairs. 
"Corne, my brave lads," said the king, "come, I must scold you." 
The musketeers approached bowing; d'Artagnan followed behind 
them. 
"What the devil!" the king went on. "Seven of His Eminence's guards 
put out of action by you four in two days! It's too much, gentlemen, too 
much. At that rate, His Eminence will be forced to replace his company in 
three weeks, and I to apply the edicts in all their rigor. One now and then 
65 
VI: His Majesty King Louis the Thirteenth  
is another thing, but seven in two days—I repeat, it's too much, much too 
much." 
"And so, Sire, Your Majesty can see that they have come to you all 
contrite and repentant to make you their apologies." 
"All contrite and repentant! Hm!" said the king. "I don't trust their 
hypocritical faces, above all that Gascon-looking one. Come here, 
Monsieur." 
D'Artagnan, who understood that the compliment was addressed to 
him, approached, putting on the most desperate air. 
"Well, now, what did you mean by telling me he was a young man? 
He's a boy, M. de Tréville, a mere boy! And it was he who gave that mighty 
stroke to Jussac?" 
"And those two fine strokes to Bernajoux." 
"Really!" 
"Not to mention," said Athos, "that if he hadn't taken me out of 
Cahusac's hands, I would most certainly not have the honor of making my 
most humble bow before Your Majesty at this moment." 
"Why, he's a veritable demon then, this Béarnais—eh, M. de Tréville? 
Ventre-saint-gris! as the king my father used to say. In that trade, you have 
to pierce many a doublet and break many a blade. Now, Gascons are 
always poor, are they not?" 
"Sire, I must say that they have yet to find gold mines in their 
mountains, though the Lord owes them that miracle in reward for the way 
they upheld the claims of the king your father." 
"Which is to say that it was the Gascons who made me king myself, 
isn't that so, Tréville, since I'm my father's son? Well, then, when the time 
is right, I don't say no. La Chesnaye, go rummage through all my pockets, 
see if you can find forty pistoles; and if you find them, bring them to me. 
And now, young man, tell me, hand on heart, how did it go?" 
D'Artagnan recounted the adventure of the day before in all its details: 
how, having been unable to sleep on account of the joy he felt at seeing His 
Majesty, he had come to his friends three hours before the time of the 
audience, how they had gone together to the sporting house, and how, for 
the fear he had shown of being hit in the face by a ball, he had been 
mocked by Bernajoux, who had nearly paid for that mockery with the loss 
of his life, and M. de La Trémouille, who had no part in it, with the loss of 
his hôtel. 
66 
The Three Musketeers 
"That's exactly it," murmured the king, "yes, that's just how the duke 
told it to me. Poor cardinal! Seven men in two days, and some of his most 
prized! But enough of that, gentlemen, you hear, enough! You've taken 
your revenge for the rue Férou, and even more; you should be satisfied." 
"If Your Majesty is," said Tréville, "then we are." 
"Yes, I am," added the king, taking a fistful of gold from La Chesnaye's 
hand and putting it into d'Artagnan's. "Here," he said, "is proof of my 
satisfaction." 
At that time, the notions of pride current in our day had not yet come 
into fashion. A gentleman received the king's money from hand to hand, 
and was not humiliated in the least. So d'Artagnan put the forty pistoles 
into his pocket without any fuss, and, on the contrary, thanked His 
Majesty greatly. 
"There," said the king, looking at his clock, "there, and now that it's 
half past eight, you may retire; for, as I told you, I'm expecting someone at 
nine. Thank you for your devotion, gentlemen. I may count on it, may I 
not?" 
"Oh, Sire!" the four companions cried with one voice, "we would get 
ourselves cut to pieces for Your Majesty." 
"Very well, very well; but stay whole—that's better still, and you'll be 
more useful to me. Tréville," the king added in a low voice while the others 
were leaving, "since you have no vacancy in the musketeers, and, besides, 
we decided that to enter that corps one has to make a novitiate, place this 
young man in the guards company of M. des Essarts, your brother-in- 
law. Ah, pardieu, Tréville, I rejoice at the grimace the cardinal is going 
to make! He'll be furious, but I don't care; I am within my rights." 
And the king waved to Tréville, who left and went to rejoin his 
musketeers, whom he found dividing up the forty pistoles with d'Artagnan. 
And the cardinal, as His Majesty had said, was indeed furious, so 
furious that for eight days he stayed away from the king's games, which did 
not prevent the king from putting on the most charming airs in the world 
with him, and asking him in the most caressing voice each time they met: 
"Well, now, Monsieur le cardinal, how are those men of yours, poor 
Bernajoux and poor Jussac, getting on?" 
67 
VII: The Musketeers at Home  
VII: The Musketeers at Home 
Once outside the Louvre, d'Artagnan consulted his friends on what use 
he should make of his share of the forty pistoles. Athos advised him to 
order a good meal at the Pomme de Pin,50 Porthos to hire a lackey, and 
Aramis to take a suitable mistress. 
The meal was executed that same day, and the lackey served at table. 
The meal had been ordered by Athos, and the lackey furnished by Porthos. 
He was a Picard51 whom the vainglorious musketeer had hired that same 
day and for this occasion on the Pont de la Tournelle, while he was spitting 
into the water to make rings. 
Porthos had held that this occupation was proof of a reflective and 
contemplative organization, and had brought him along without further 
recommendation. The grand bearing of this gentleman, in whose service 
he believed himself engaged, had seduced Planchet—for that was the 
Picard's name. He was slightly disappointed when he saw that the place 
had already been taken by a colleague named Mousqueton, and when 
Porthos pointed out to him that his household, though large, could not 
include two servants, and that he was to enter d'Artagnan's service. 
However, when he assisted at the dinner given by his master, and saw the 
latter take a fistful of gold from his pocket in order to pay, he thought his 
fortune was made and thanked heaven that he had fallen into the 
possession of such a Croesus. He persevered in this opinion until after the 
feast, from the leftovers of which he rewarded himself for much 
abstinence. But when he went to make up his master's bed in the evening, 
Planchet's pipe dreams vanished. The bed was the only one in the 
apartment, which consisted of an antechamber and a bedroom. Planchet 
slept in the antechamber on a blanket taken from d'Artagnan's bed, which 
d'Ar-tagnan henceforth did without. 
Athos, for his part, had a valet whom he had trained for his service in a 
rather special manner, and who was named Grimaud. He was extremely 
taciturn, this worthy lord. We are speaking of Athos, of course. For five or 
six years he had lived in the most profound intimacy with his companions 
Porthos and Aramis, the latter recalled having seen him smile often, but 
they had never heard him laugh. His utterances were brief and expressive, 
always saying what they meant to say and nothing more: no 
embellishments, no embroideries, no arabesques. His conversation was a 
fact without accessories. 
68 
The Three Musketeers 
Though Athos was barely thirty years old and was extremely handsome 
of body and mind, no one knew him to have a mistress. He never spoke of 
women. But he did not prevent people from speaking of them in front of 
him, though it was easy to see that this sort of conversation, which he 
mixed into only with bitter comments and misanthropic observations, was 
perfectly disagreeable to him. His reserve, his unsociability, and his silence 
made him almost an old man. Thus, in order not to depart from his habits, 
he had accustomed Grimaud to obeying him at a simple gesture or a 
simple movement of the lips. He never spoke to him except in ultimate 
circumstances. 
Sometimes Grimaud, who feared his master like fire, though he had 
great affection for his person and great veneration for his genius, believed 
he had perfectly understood what he wanted, rushed to carry out the order 
received, and did precisely the contrary. Then Athos would shrug his 
shoulders and, without getting angry, give Grimaud a thrashing. 
Porthos, as we have seen, had a character totally opposite to that of 
Athos: he not only talked a great deal, he also talked loudly; moreover, it 
mattered little to him—we must do him justice—whether anyone listened 
or not; he talked for the pleasure of talking and for the pleasure of hearing 
himself; he talked about everything except the sciences, pleading on that 
side the inveterate hatred which he had borne for scholars since 
childhood. He had less of a grand air than Athos, and his feeling of 
inferiority in that regard, at the beginning of their relations, had often 
made him unfair towards that gentleman, whom he attempted to surpass 
by his splendid outfits. But, with his simple musketeer's tabard, and merely 
by the way he threw back his head and advanced his foot, Athos instantly 
took the place that was his due and relegated the showy Porthos to second 
rank. Porthos consoled himself for that by filling M. de Tréville's 
antechamber and the guards corps at the Louvre with the noise of his 
successes, which Athos never spoke of, and for the moment, after passing 
from the nobility of the robe to the nobility of the sword, from the 
"judgess" to the baroness, it was a question for Porthos of nothing less than 
a foreign princess who wished him enormously well. 
An old proverb says: "Like master, like man." Let us go on, then, from 
Athos's man to Porthos's man, from Grimaud to Mousqueton. 
Mousqueton was a Norman whose master had changed his name from 
the pacific name of Boniface to the infinitely more sonorous and bellicose 
Mousqueton.52 He had entered Porthos's service on condition that he 
69 
VII: The Musketeers at Home  
would be housed and clothed only, but in magnificent fashion; he required 
just two hours a day to devote himself to an industry that was sufficient to 
provide for his other needs. Porthos had accepted the deal; the thing 
suited him perfectly. He had doublets made for Mousqueton out of his old 
clothes and spare cloaks, and, thanks to a highly intelligent tailor, who 
made these rags like new by turning them inside out, and whose wife was 
suspected of wishing to bring Porthos down from his aristocratic habits, 
Mousqueton cut a very fine figure behind his master. 
As for Aramis, whose character we believe we have sufficiently 
introduced, a character moreover which, like that of his companions, we 
will be able to follow in its development, his lackey was named Bazin. 
Thanks to his master's hope of one day entering into orders, he always 
went dressed in black, as a churchman's servant should do. He came from 
Berry, was thirty-five or forty years old, gentle, peaceable, plump, occupied 
with reading pious works in the moments of leisure his master left him, 
and in a pinch could prepare a dinner for two, of few dishes, but excellent. 
Deaf, dumb, and blind to boot, and of the staunchest loyalty. 
Now that we know both the masters and the valets, at least 
superficially, let us go on to the dwellings they occupied. 
Athos lived on the rue Férou, two steps from the Luxembourg. His 
apartment consisted of two small rooms, very decently furnished, in a 
rooming house whose still young and truly still beautiful hostess uselessly 
made soft eyes at him. Some fragments of a great past splendor shone here 
and there on the walls of these modest lodgings: there was a sword, for 
example, richly damascened, of the sort fashionable in the period of 
François I, and of which the hilt alone, encrusted with precious stones, 
might have been worth two hundred pistoles, and yet, in his moments of 
greatest distress, Athos had never agreed to pawn or sell it. Porthos had 
long had his heart set on this sword. He would have given ten years of his 
life to own it. 
One day when he had a rendezvous with a duchess, he even tried to 
borrow it from Athos. Athos, without saying a word, emptied his pockets, 
collected all his jewels—purses, aiguillettes, and gold chains—and offered 
it all to Porthos; but, as for the sword, it was sealed in its place and would 
never leave it until its master himself left his lodgings. Besides his sword, 
he also had a portrait of a lord from the time of Henri III, dressed with the 
greatest elegance and wearing the Order of the Holy Spirit,53 and this 
portrait bore a certain resemblance to Athos in its lineaments, a certain 
70 
The Three Musketeers 
family resemblance, which indicated that this great lord, a chevalier of the 
king's orders, was his ancestor. 
Finally, a casket of magnificent goldsmith's work, with the same coat of 
arms as the sword and the portrait, made a chim-neypiece that clashed 
frightfully with the rest of the trimmings. Athos always carried the key to 
this casket with him. But one day he had opened it in front of Porthos, and 
Porthos had been able to assure himself that it contained only letters and 
papers: love letters and family papers, no doubt. 
Porthos lived in an apartment of vast size and sumptuous appearance 
on the rue du Vieux-Colombier. Each time he passed with some friend in 
front of his windows, at one of which Mousqueton always stood in full 
livery, Porthos would raise his head and his hand, and say: "There's my 
abode!" But he was never found at home, he never invited anyone to come 
up, and no one had any idea of what this sumptuous appearance enclosed 
by way of real riches. 
As for Aramis, he lived in small quarters consisting of a boudoir, a 
dining room, and a bedroom, which bedroom, located on the ground floor 
like the rest of the apartment, gave onto a small garden, cool, green, shady, 
and impenetrable to neighboring eyes. 
And as for d'Artagnan, we already know how he was lodged, and we 
have already made the acquaintance of his lackey, Master Planchet. 
D'Artagnan, who was of a very curious nature, as people with a genius 
for intrigue generally are, made every effort to find out who Athos, 
Porthos, and Aramis really were; for, under these noms de guerre, each of 
the young men concealed his name as a gentleman, Athos above all, who 
smelled of a great lord a league away. He thus turned to Porthos for 
information about Athos and Aramis, and to Aramis for the truth about 
Porthos. 
Unfortunately, Porthos himself knew nothing about his silent 
comrade's life except what had come to light. It was said that he had 
known great misfortunes in his amorous affairs, and that a terrible betrayal 
had poisoned the gallant man's life forever. What was this betrayal? No 
one knew. 
As for Porthos, apart from his real name, which M. de Tréville alone 
knew, along with those of his two comrades, his life was easily learned. 
Vain and indiscreet, he could be seen through like a crystal. The only thing 
that could have thrown off the investigator would have been to believe all 
the good he said of himself. 
71 
VII: The Musketeers at Home  
As for Aramis, while he had an air of having no secrets, this was a lad 
all steeped in mysteries, responding little to questions put to him about 
others, and eluding those put to him about himself. One day, d'Artagnan, 
after having interrogated him for a long time about Porthos, and having 
learned the rumor then going around about the musketeer's success with a 
princess, also wanted to know about his interlocutor's amorous 
adventures. 
"And you, my dear companion," he said to hirn, "you who talk about 
other men's baronesses, duchesses, and princesses?" 
"Excuse me," Aramis interrupted, "I talked about them because Porthos 
talks about them himself, because he has cried out all these pretty things 
in front of me. But believe me, my dear M. d'Artagnan, if I had them from 
another source, or he had told them to me in confidence, he could have 
had no confessor more discreet than I." 
"I don't doubt it," d'Artagnan picked up, "but actually it seems to me 
that you yourself are rather familiar with coats of arms—witness a certain 
embroidered handkerchief to which I owe the honor of your 
acquaintance." 
This time Aramis did not become angry, but put on his most modest 
air and replied affectionately: 
"My dear, don't forget that I wish to be in the Church, and I flee all 
worldly circumstances. That handkerchief you saw was never entrusted to 
me, it had been forgotten at my place by one of my friends. I had to take it 
so as not to compromise them, he and the lady he loves. As for me, I do 
not have and do not wish to have a mistress, following in this the highly 
judicious example of Athos, who has one no more than I do." 
"But, devil take it, you're not an abbé, you're a musketeer!" 
"An interim musketeer, my dear, as the cardinal says, a musketeer 
against my will, but a man of the Church at heart, believe me. Athos and 
Porthos dragged me into it to keep me occupied: at the moment of my 
ordination, I had a small difficulty with . . . But that hardly interests you, 
and I'm taking up your precious time." 
"Not at all, it interests me very much," cried d'Artagnan, "and for the 
moment I have absolutely nothing to do." 
"Yes, but I have my breviary to recite," replied Aramis, "then some 
verses to compose at Mme d'Aiguillon's request; then I have to go to the 
rue Saint-Honoré to buy rouge for Mme de Chevreuse. So you see, my dear 
friend, if you are not in a hurry, I certainly am." 
72 
The Three Musketeers 
And Aramis affectionately held out his hand to his friend and took 
leave of him. 
D'Artagnan, for all the pains he took, could find out nothing more 
about his three new friends. He chose therefore to believe for the present 
all that he had been told about their past, hoping for more certain and 
extensive revelations in the future. Meanwhile, he considered Athos an 
Achilles, Porthos an Ajax, and Aramis a Joseph.54 
Besides, the life of the four young men was merry. Athos gambled, and 
always unluckily. However, he never borrowed a sou from his friends, 
though his purse was constantly at their service, and when he gambled on 
credit, he always woke up his creditor at six o'clock the next morning to 
pay him his debt from the day before. 
Porthos had his impulses: on those days, if he won, he went around 
insolent and splendid; if he lost, he disappeared for several days, after 
which he reappeared looking pale and drawn, but with money in his 
pockets. 
As for Aramis, he never gambled. He was quite the worst musketeer 
and the most miserable guest you could ever see. He always had to work. 
Sometimes, in the middle of a dinner, when everyone, carried away by the 
wine and the heat of conversation, thought they would remain at the table 
for a good two or three hours more, Aramis would look at his watch, get up 
with a gracious smile, and take leave of the company—to go, he said, and 
consult a casuist with whom he had a rendezvous. Other times he would 
return to his lodgings to write a thesis, and begged his friends not to 
distract him. 
However, Athos would smile that charming, melancholy smile that 
suited his noble face so well, and Porthos would drink an oath that Aramis 
would never become a village priest. 
Planchet, d'Artagnan's valet, bore good fortune nobly. He received 
thirty sous a day, and for a month returned to his lodgings gay as a 
chaffinch and feeling affable towards his master. When the wind of 
adversity began to blow on the household of the rue des Fossoyeurs, that is 
to say, when the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII were eaten up, or almost, 
he began to complain in a way that Athos found nauseating, Porthos 
indecent, and Aramis ridiculous. Athos then advised d'Artagnan to dismiss 
the rascal, Porthos wanted him cudgeled first, and Aramis maintained that 
a master should only heed the compliments he was paid. 
73 
VII: The Musketeers at Home  
"That's easy enough for you to say," d'Artagnan picked up, "for you, 
Athos, who live mutely with Grimaud, who forbid him to speak, and who, 
consequently, never have any bad words from him; for you, Porthos, who 
live in a magnificent manner and are a god to your valet Mousqueton; for 
you, Aramis, who are always distracted by your theological studies, 
inspiring a deep respect in your servant Bazin, a gentle and religious man; 
but I, who am without substance and resources, I who am not a musketeer 
nor even a guard, what can I do to inspire affection, terror, or respect in 
Planchet?" 
"It's a grave matter," replied the three friends. "It's an internal affair. 
It's the same with valets as with women: you have to put them straight 
away on the footing you want them to remain on. Reflect, then." 
D'Artagnan reflected and decided to thrash him for a start, which was 
done with the conscientiousness that d'Artagnan put into everything; then, 
after thrashing him well, he forbade him to leave his service without his 
permission. "For," he added, "the future cannot fail me; I inevitably await 
better times. So your fortune is made if you stay with me, and I am too 
kind a master to make you miss your fortune by granting you the leave you 
are asking me for." 
This way of acting gave the musketeers a great deal of respect for 
d'Artagnan's diplomacy. Planchet was also struck with admiration and said 
nothing more about quitting. 
The lives of the four young men became a common one. D'Artagnan, 
who had no habits, since he had come from his province and fallen into 
the midst of a world that was entirely new to him, soon took up the habits 
of his friends. 
They got up towards eight o'clock in the winter, towards six o'clock in 
the summer, and went to take their orders and the air of events at M. de 
Tréville's. D'Artagnan, though he was not a musketeer, did the service of 
one with a touching punctuality: he was always on guard duty, because he 
always kept company with the one of his three friends, who mounted 
guard himself. He was known in the hôtel of the musketeers, and everyone 
held him to be a good comrade. M. de Tréville, who had appraised him at 
first glance, and who bore a genuine affection for him, constantly 
recommended him to the king. 
For their part, the three musketeers loved their young friend greatly. 
The friendship that united the four men, and the need to see each other 
three or four times a day, either for a duel, or for business, or for pleasure, 
74 
The Three Musketeers 
kept them constantly running after one another like shadows; and one 
could always come upon the inseparables if one searched between the 
Luxembourg and the place Saint-Sulpice, or between the rue du Vieux
Colombier and the Luxembourg. 
Meanwhile M. de Tréville's promises were taking their course. One fine 
day, the king commanded M. le chevalier des Essarts to take d'Artagnan as 
a cadet in his guards company. D'Artagnan sighed as he put on the 
uniform, which he would have exchanged at the price of ten years of his 
existence against the tabard of a musketeer. But M. de Tréville promised 
him that favor after a two-year novitiate, a novitiate which, moreover, 
could be shortened, if the occasion presented itself for d'Artagnan to 
render some service to the king or to perform some brilliant action. 
D'Artagnan withdrew on that promise, and the next day began his service. 
Then it was the turn of Athos, Porthos, and Aramis to mount guard 
with d'Artagnan when he was on duty. The company of M. le chevalier des 
Essarts thus acquired four men instead of one on the day it acquired 
d'Artagnan. 
VIII: A Court Intrigue 
However, the forty pistoles of King Louis XIII, like all things in this 
world, having had a beginning, also had an end, and since that end our 
four companions had fallen into tight straits. At first Athos had supported 
the association for a time out of his own pocket. Porthos had succeeded 
him, and, thanks to one of those disappearances to which they were 
accustomed, had met the needs of all for another fortnight. Finally had 
come the turn of Aramis, who had complied with good grace, and 
managed, as he said, to get hold of a few pistoles by selling his theology 
books. 
Then, as usual, they had recourse to M. de Tréville, who gave them 
some advances on their pay; but on these advances three musketeers who 
already had many accounts in arrears, and a guard who as yet had none, 
could not go far. 
Finally, when they saw that they would soon run out entirely, they 
gathered eight or ten pistoles in a last effort, and Porthos gambled on 
them. Unfortunately, his luck was bad: he lost it all, plus twenty-five 
pistoles on credit. 
75 
VIII: A Court Intrigue  
Then tight straits became real distress. The hungry men were seen, 
followed by their valets, roaming the quais and guards' quarters, gleaning 
from their outside friends all the dinners they could find; for, according to 
Aramis, in prosperity one should sow meals right and left, in order to 
harvest some in adversity. 
Athos was invited four times and each time brought along his friends 
with their lackeys. Porthos had six occasions and let his friends enjoy them 
equally. Aramis had eight. He was a man, as we have already been able to 
perceive, of little noise and much work. 
As for d'Artagnan, who still knew no one in the capital, he found only a 
breakfast of chocolate with a priest from his part of the country, and a 
dinner with a cornet of the guards. He led his army to the priest, where 
they devoured two months' worth of his provisions, and to the cornet, who 
worked wonders; but, as Planchet said, you only eat once, even when you 
eat a lot. 
D'Artagnan thus found himself rather humiliated to have only a meal 
and a half, for the breakfast with the priest could count as only half a meal, 
to offer his companions in exchange for the feasts procured by Athos, 
Porthos, and Aramis. He felt himself a burden to the society, forgetting in 
his quite youthful good faith that he had fed that society for a month, and 
his worried mind began working actively. He reflected that this coalition of 
four brave, enterprising, and active young men should have some other 
end than swaggering promenades, fencing lessons, and more or less witty 
gibes. 
Indeed, four men like them, four men devoted to each other from their 
money to their lives, four men always supporting each other, never 
retreating, performing singly or together the resolutions they had made in 
common; four arms threatening the four points of the compass or all 
turning to a single point, must inevitably, be it surreptitiously, be it openly, 
be it by mines, by entrenchments, by guile, or by force, open a way to the 
end they wanted to reach, however well defended or far off it might be. 
The only thing that surprised d'Artagnan was that his companions had 
never thought of it. 
He was thinking of it, and even seriously, racking his brain to find a 
direction for this single force multiplied four times, with which he had no 
doubt that, as with the lever sought by Archimedes,55 they would be able 
to lift the world—when someone knocked softly on his door. D'Artagnan 
woke Planchet and ordered him to go and open it. 
76 
The Three Musketeers 
This phrase—d'Artagnan woke Planchet—should not lead the reader 
to conclude that it was night or that day had not yet come. No, it had just 
struck four! Two hours earlier, Planchet had come to ask his master for 
dinner, and in reply had received the proverb: "He who sleeps, eats." And 
so Planchet ate by sleeping. 
A man was ushered in, of rather simple bearing and with the air of a 
bourgeois. 
Planchet would have liked to listen to the conversation for dessert, but 
the bourgeois declared to d'Artagnan that, as what he had to tell him was 
important and confidential, he wished to be alone with him. 
D'Artagnan dismissed Planchet and invited his visitor to sit down. 
There was a moment of silence during which the two men looked at 
each other as if to make a preliminary acquaintance, after which 
d'Artagnan nodded as a sign that he was listening. 
"I have heard M. d'Artagnan spoken of as a brave young man," said the 
bourgeois, "and that reputation which he justly enjoys made me decide to 
entrust him with a secret." 
"Speak, Monsieur, speak," said d'Artagnan, who instinctively scented 
something advantageous. 
The bourgeois paused again and then went on: 
"My wife is a seamstress to the queen, Monsieur, and is lacking neither 
in wisdom nor in beauty. It will soon be three years since she was married 
to me, though she had only a little fortune, because M. de La Porte,56 the 
queen's cloak bearer, is her godfather and protector ..." 
"Well, then, Monsieur?" asked d'Artagnan. 
"Well, then," the bourgeois picked up, "well, then, Monsieur, my wife 
was abducted yesterday morning as she was coming out of her workroom." 
"And by whom was your wife abducted?" 
"I know nothing for certain, Monsieur, but there is someone I suspect." 
"And who is this person you suspect?" 
"A man who has been pursuing her for a long time." 
"Devil take it!" 
"But let me tell you, Monsieur," the bourgeois went on, "I myself am 
convinced that there is less love than politics in all this." 
"Less love than politics," d'Artagnan picked up with a very thoughtful 
air, "and what do you suspect?" 
"I don't know if I should tell you what I suspect..." 
77 
VIII: A Court Intrigue  
"Monsieur, I will point out to you that I am demanding absolutely 
nothing from you. It is you who have come to me. It is you who have told 
me that you have a secret to entrust to me. Do as you please, then, you still 
have time to back out." 
"No, Monsieur, no; you seem to be an honest young man, and I will 
trust you. I believe, then, that my wife has been apprehended not on 
account of her love affairs, but on account of those of a woman higher than 
she." 
"Aha! might it be on account of the love affairs of Mme de Bois-Tracy?" 
said d'Artagnan, who wished to have the air, vis-à-vis his bourgeois, of 
being in the know about the doings at court. 
"Higher, Monsieur, higher." 
"Of Mme d'Aiguillon?" 
"Still higher." 
"Of Mme de Chevreuse?" 
"Higher, much higher!" 
"Of the ..." d'Artagnan stopped. 
"Yes, Monsieur," the frightened bourgeois replied, so softly that he 
could barely be heard. 
"And with whom?" 
"Who can it be, if not the duke of . . ." 
"The duke of..." 
"Yes, Monsieur!" replied the bourgeois, giving a still lower intonation 
to his voice. 
"But how do you know all that?" 
"Ah! how do I know?" 
"Yes, how do you know? No half trust, or . . . you understand." 
"I know it from my wife, Monsieur, from my wife herself." 
"Who knows it from whom?" 
"From M. de La Porte. Didn't I tell you that she is the goddaughter of 
M. de La Porte, the queen's trusted man? Well, M. de La Porte placed her 
near Her Majesty so that our poor queen would have at least someone to 
trust, abandoned as she is by the king, spied on as she is by the cardinal, 
betrayed as she is by everyone." 
"Aha! something's taking shape here," said d'Artagnan. 
"Now, my wife came four days ago, Monsieur. One of her conditions 
was that she should visit me twice a week, for, as I have had the honor of 
78 
The Three Musketeers 
telling you, my wife loves me very much. So my wife came and confided to 
me that the queen was in great fear at that moment." 
"Really?" 
"Yes, M. le cardinal, as it seems, is pursuing her and persecuting her 
more than ever. He cannot forgive her the story of the saraband. You know 
the story of the saraband?" 
"Pardieu, as if I didn't!" replied d'Artagnan, who knew nothing at all 
about it, but wanted to have the air of being in the know. 
"So that now it is no longer a matter of hatred, but of vengeance." 
"Really?" 
"And the queen thinks ..." 
"Well, what does the queen think?" 
"She thinks someone has written to the duke of Buckingham in her 
name." 
"In the queen's name?" 
"Yes, to make him come to Paris, and once he has come to Paris, to 
draw him into some trap." 
"Devil take it! But what, my dear Monsieur, does your wife have to do 
with all this?" 
"Her devotion to the queen is known, and they want to distance her 
from Her Majesty, or intimidate her in order to find out Her Majesty's 
secrets, or seduce her in order to use her as a spy." 
"That's probable," said d'Artagnan. "But do you know the man who 
abducted her?" 
"I've told you that I think I know him." 
"His name?" 
"I don't know that; I know only that he is a creature of the cardinal, his 
tool." 
"But have you seen him?" 
"Yes, my wife showed him to me one day." 
"Does he have any signs one could recognize him by?" 
"Oh, certainly! He's a lord of haughty bearing, black hair, dark skin, a 
piercing eye, white teeth, and a scar on his temple." 
"A scar on his temple!" cried d'Artagnan. "And along with that, white 
teeth, a piercing eye, dark skin, black hair, and a haughty bearing! It's my 
man from Meung!" 
"Your man, you say?" 
79 
VIII: A Court Intrigue  
"Yes, yes, but that doesn't change anything. No, I'm wrong; that 
simplifies a great deal. On the contrary: if your man is mine, I'll have two 
vengeances at one stroke, that's all. But where can the man be found?" 
"I don't know." 
"You have no information about where he lives?" 
"None. One day as I was taking my wife back to the Louvre, he came 
out as she was going in, and she pointed him out to me." 
"Devil take it! Devil take it!" murmured d'Artagnan. "This is all very 
vague. Who told you about your wife's abduction?" 
"M. de La Porte." 
"Did he give you any details?" 
"He had none." 
"And you've learned nothing from any other quarter?" 
"Yes, I have. I received ..." 
"What?" 
"But perhaps I am committing a great imprudence?" 
"You're starting on that again? However, I'll observe to you that this 
time it's a bit late to back out." 
"I am not backing out, mordieu!" cried the bourgeois, swearing in order 
to work himself up. "Besides, on Bonacieux's honor ..." 
"Your name is Bonacieux?" interrupted d'Artagnan. 
"Yes, it is." 
"So you were saying: on Bonacieux's honor! Forgive me for interrupting 
you, but it seemed to me that the name was not unknown to me." 
"That's possible, Monsieur. I am your landlord." 
"Aha!" said d'Artagnan, half rising and bowing to him, "you are my 
landlord?" 
"Yes, Monsieur, yes. And as it's three months now that you've been 
with me, and, no doubt distracted by your great occupations, you have 
forgotten to pay me my rent—as, I say, I have not pestered you once, I 
thought you might show consideration for my delicate position." 
"But of course, my dear M. Bonacieux!" d'Artagnan picked up. "Believe 
me, I'm filled with gratitude for such fair dealing, and, as I've said, if I can 
help you somehow ..." 
"I believe you, Monsieur, I believe you, and as I was about to tell you, 
on Bonacieux's honor, I trust you." 
"Then finish what you've begun telling me." 
80 
The Three Musketeers 
The bourgeois drew a paper from his pocket and handed it to 
d'Artagnan. 
"A letter!" cried the young man. 
D'Artagnan opened it, and as the light was beginning to fade, he went 
over to the window. The bourgeois followed him. 
“‘Do not look for your wife,' " d'Artagnan read. " 'She will be returned 
to you when there is no more need for her. If you take a single step to find 
her, you are lost.' " 
"That's straightforward enough," d'Artagnan went on. "But, after all, it's 
just a threat." 
"Yes, but this threat frightens me. I, Monsieur, am no swordsman at all, 
and I'm afraid of the Bastille." 
"Hm!" said d'Artagnan. "But I care no more for the Bastille than you do. 
If it's only a question of swordplay, it's not much." 
"However, Monsieur, I've been counting on you in this matter." 
"Oh?" 
"Seeing you constantly surrounded by superb-looking musketeers, and 
recognizing that these musketeers were those of M. de Tréville, and 
consequently the cardinal's enemies, I've been thinking that you and your 
friends, while rendering justice to our poor queen, would be delighted to 
do His Eminence a bad turn." 
"Unquestionably." 
"And then I've been thinking that, owing me three months rent, which 
I have never mentioned to you ..." 
"Yes, yes, you've already given me that reason, and I find it excellent." 
"Counting, what's more, on never mentioning your future rent, as long 
as you do me the honor of staying with me . . ." 
"Very good." 
"And added to that, if need be, counting on offering you fifty pistoles, 
if, against all probability, you find yourself in tight straits at the moment.” 
"Wonderful! So you're a rich man, my dear M. Bonacieux?" 
"I'm comfortably off, Monsieur, that's the word. I've put together 
something like two or three thousand écus of income in the mercery trade, 
and above all by investing certain sums in the last voyage of the famous 
navigator Jean Mocquet,57 so that, you can understand, Monsieur . . . Ah! 
but..." cried the bourgeois. 
"What?" asked d'Artagnan. 
"What's this I see?" 
81 
VIII: A Court Intrigue  
"Where?" 
"In the street, across from your windows, in that doorway: a man 
wrapped in a cloak." 
"It's he!" d'Artagnan and the bourgeois cried out at once, each having 
recognized his man at the same time. 
"Ah! this time," cried d'Artagnan, leaping for his sword, "this time he 
won't escape me!" 
And, drawing his sword from the scabbard, he rushed out of the 
apartment. 
On the stairs he ran into Athos and Porthos, who were coming to see 
him. They separated, and d'Artagnan passed between them like a shot. 
"Ah! but where are you running like that?" the two musketeers called 
after him. 
"The man from Meung!" replied d'Artagnan, and he disappeared. 
D'Artagnan had more than once told his friends about his adventure 
with the unknown man, and of the appearance of the beautiful traveler to 
whom this man seemed to have entrusted some important missive. 
Athos's view had been that d'Artagnan had lost his letter in the scuffle. 
A gentleman, according to him—and from the portrait d'Artagnan had 
painted of the unknown man, he could only have been a gentleman—a 
gentleman would have been incapable of such baseness as stealing a letter. 
Porthos had seen nothing in it all but an amorous rendezvous granted 
by a lady to a cavalier or by a cavalier to a lady, and which had been 
disturbed by the presence of d'Artagnan and his yellow horse. 
Aramis had said that, such things being mysterious, it was better not to 
go into them. 
They understood, then, from the few words d'Artagnan let drop, what 
the matter was, and as they thought that, after overtaking his man or 
losing sight of him, d'Artagnan would in any case come back home, they 
continued on their way. 
When they came into d'Artagnan's room, the room was empty: the 
landlord, fearing the consequences of the encounter that was undoubtedly 
about to take place between the young guard and the unknown man, had, 
in consequence of the display of character he himself had just made, 
judged it prudent to decamp. 
82 
The Three Musketeers 
IX: D'Artagnan Shows Himself 
As Athos and Porthos had foreseen, d'Artagnan came back in half an 
hour. This time, too, he had missed his man, who had disappeared as if by 
magic. D'Artagnan had run, sword in hand, through all the surrounding 
streets, but had found nothing resembling the man he was looking for; 
then he had finally come back to what he perhaps should have started 
with, which was to knock on the door against which the unknown man 
had been leaning. He had rapped with the knocker ten or twelve times, but 
in vain; no one had answered, and the neighbors, who, attracted by the 
noise, had come running to their doorways or stuck their noses out the 
window, had assured him that the house, in which, moreover, all the 
openings were closed up, had been uninhabited for six months. 
While d'Artagnan was running through the streets and knocking at 
doors, Aramis had joined his two companions, so that when he came 
home, d'Artagnan found the reunion at full strength. 
"Well, then?" the three musketeers said at once, on seeing d'Artagnan 
come in, sweat on his brow and his face distorted with wrath. 
"Well, then," he cried, throwing his sword on the bed, "the man must 
be the devil himself! He disappeared like a phantom, a shade, a ghost." 
"Do you believe in apparitions?" Athos asked Porthos. 
"Me? I only believe what I've seen, and since I've never seen any 
apparitions, I don't believe in them." 
"The Bible," said Aramis, "makes it a law for us to believe in them: the 
shade of Samuel appeared to Saul,58 and that is an article of faith I would 
be sorry to see put in doubt, Porthos." 
"In any case, man or devil, body or shade, illusion or reality, that man 
was born for my damnation, for his escape has cost us a splendid business, 
gentlemen, a business in which there were a hundred pistoles to be gained 
and maybe more." 
"How's that?" Porthos and Aramis said at once. 
As for Athos, faithful to his system of silence, he contented himself 
with questioning d'Artagnan with a look. 
"Planchet," d'Artagnan said to his servant, who just then stuck his head 
through the half-open door to try to catch some shreds of the 
conversation, "go downstairs to the landlord, M. Bonacieux, and tell him to 
send us a half dozen bottles of Beaugency—it's my favorite wine." 
"Ah, well, so you have open credit with your landlord?" asked Porthos. 
83 
IX: D'Artagnan Shows Himself  
"Yes," replied d'Artagnan, "starting from today, and don't worry, if his 
wine is bad, we'll send him out for better." 
"One must use, not abuse," Aramis said sententiously. 
"I've always said that d'Artagnan had the best head of the four of us," 
said Athos, who, after coming out with this opinion, to which d'Artagnan 
responded with a bow, relapsed at once into his customary silence. 
"But, look here, what's he got finally?" asked Porthos. 
"Yes," said Aramis, "confide it to us, my dear friend, unless the honor of 
some lady happens to be involved in the confidence, in which case you'd 
do better to keep it to yourself." 
"Don't worry," replied d'Artagnan, "nobody's honor will find fault with 
what I have to tell you." 
And then he told his friends, word for word, what had just gone on 
between himself and his landlord, and how the man who had abducted the 
worthy householder's wife was the same with whom he had had a bone to 
pick at the hôtel of the Jolly Miller. 
"It's not a bad business," said Athos, after having tasted the wine as a 
connoisseur and indicated with a nod of the head that he found it good, 
"and we could get fifty or sixty pistoles out of the brave man. Now it 
remains to find out if fifty or sixty pistoles are worth the trouble of risking 
four heads." 
"But mind you," cried d'Artagnan, "there's a woman involved in this 
business, an abducted woman, a woman who is no doubt being 
threatened, who is perhaps being tortured, and all that because she's 
faithful to her mistress!" 
"Take care, d'Artagnan, take care," said Aramis, "you're getting a bit too 
excited, in my opinion, about the fate of Mme Bonacieux. Woman was 
created for our ruin, and it is from her that all our miseries come." 
At this pronouncement from Aramis, Athos frowned and bit his lips. 
"It's not at all Mme Bonacieux that worries me," cried d'Artagnan, "it's 
the queen, whom the king has abandoned, whom the cardinal persecutes, 
and who has seen the heads of her friends fall one after another.” 
"Why does she love what we detest most in the world—the Spanish 
and the English?" 
"Spain is her country," replied d'Artagnan, "and it's quite simple why 
she loves the Spanish, they're children of the same land as she. As for the 
second reproach you make against her, I've heard it said that she loves not 
the English, but one Englishman." 
84 
The Three Musketeers 
"Ah, by heaven," said Athos, "one must admit that that Englishman was 
quite worthy of being loved! I've never seen grander bearing than his." 
"Not to mention that he dresses like no one else," said Porthos. "I was 
at the Louvre the day he scattered his pearls, and, pardieu, I gathered up 
two that I sold for ten pistoles apiece. And you, Aramis, do you know 
him?" 
"As well as you do, gentlemen, for I was one of those who arrested him 
in the garden at Amiens, where I had been introduced by M. de Putange,59 
the queen's equerry. I was in seminary at that time, and the adventure 
seemed to me cruel for the king." 
"Which wouldn't prevent me," said d'Artagnan, "from taking the duke 
of Buckingham by the hand, if I knew where he was, and bringing him to 
the queen, if only so as to enrage the cardinal; for our real, only, eternal 
enemy, gentlemen, is the cardinal, and if we could find the means of 
playing him some really cruel turn, I confess I'd gladly risk my head on it." 
"And," Athos picked up, "the mercer told you, d'Artagnan, that the 
queen thought someone had made Buckingham come on false notice." 
"She's afraid so." 
"Wait," said Aramis. 
"For what?" asked Porthos. 
"Just a minute, I'm trying to remember the circumstances." 
"And now I'm convinced," said d'Artagnan, "that the abduction of this 
woman of the queen's is connected to the events we're speaking of, and 
maybe to M. de Buckingham's presence in Paris." 
"The Gascon's full of ideas," Porthos said with admiration. 
"I love to hear him speak," said Athos, "his patter amuses me." 
"Gentlemen," Aramis picked up, "listen to this." 
"Listen to Aramis," said the three friends. 
"Yesterday I happened to be with a learned doctor of theology, whom I 
consult occasionally to do with my studies ..." 
Athos smiled. 
"He lives in a deserted quarter," Aramis went on, "his tastes and his 
profession demand it. Now, just as I was leaving his place ..." 
Here Aramis stopped. 
"Well?" asked his listeners, "just as you were leaving his place?" 
Aramis seemed to be struggling with himself, like a man who, in the 
midst of a lie, finds himself stopped by some unforeseen obstacle. But the 
85 
IX: D'Artagnan Shows Himself  
eyes of his three companions were fixed on him, their ears waited gaping, 
there was no way to retreat. 
"This doctor has a niece," Aramis went on. 
"Ah! he has a niece!" Porthos interrupted. 
"A highly respectable lady," said Aramis. 
The three friends began to laugh. 
"Ah, if you laugh, or if you doubt me," said Aramis, "then you'll learn 
nothing!" 
"We're as believing as Mohammedists and as mute as catafalques," said 
Athos. 
"To continue, then," Aramis went on. "This niece sometimes comes to 
see her uncle. Now, she happened to be there yesterday at the same time I 
was, by chance, and I had to show her to her carriage." 
"Ah, the doctor's niece has a carriage?" interrupted Porthos, one of 
whose failings was great verbal incontinence. "A nice acquaintance, my 
friend." 
"Porthos," Aramis picked up, "I've already pointed out to you more 
than once that you are extremely indiscreet, and that it does you harm 
with women." 
"Gentlemen, gentlemen," cried d'Artagnan, who began to see the point 
of the game, "this is a serious thing; let's try not to joke if we can help it. 
Go on, Aramis, go on." 
"All of a sudden a tall man, dark-haired, with the manners of a 
gentleman ... in fact, just like your man, d'Artagnan ..." 
"The same, perhaps," said the latter. 
"It's possible," Aramis continued, "... approached me, accompanied by 
five or six men who followed ten paces behind him, and said to me in the 
most polite tone: 'Monsieur le duc, and you, Madame,' he went on, turning 
to the lady who was on my arm ..." 
"The doctor's niece?" 
"Be quiet, Porthos," said Athos, "you're insufferable!" 
"'. . . kindly get into this carriage, and without offering the slightest 
resistance, without making the slightest noise.' " 
"He took you for Buckingham!" cried d'Artagnan. 
"I believe so," replied Aramis. 
"But the lady?" asked Porthos. 
"He took her for the queen!" said d'Artagnan. 
"Precisely," said Aramis. 
86 
The Three Musketeers 
"The Gascon's a real devil!" cried Athos. "Nothing escapes him!" 
"The fact is," said Porthos, "that Aramis is the same size and has 
something of the same figure as the handsome duke. It seems to me, 
however, that the uniform of a musketeer ..." 
"I had an enormous cloak," said Aramis. 
"In the month of July, devil take it!" said Porthos. "Is the doctor afraid 
you'll be recognized?" 
"I can understand," said Athos, "that the spy was taken in by the figure; 
but the face ..." 
"I had a big hat," said Aramis. 
"Oh, my God!" cried Porthos. "Such precautions in order to study 
theology!" 
"Gentlemen, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, "don't waste time bantering. 
Let's divide up and search for the mercer's wife, that's the key to the plot." 
"A woman of such inferior condition? Do you really think so, 
d'Artagnan?" said Porthos, drawing out his lips in disdain. 
"She's the goddaughter of La Porte, the queen's trusted valet. Didn't I 
tell you that, gentlemen? And besides, maybe it was out of calculation that 
Her Majesty sought support, this time, in such low places. High heads can 
be seen from far off, and the cardinal has good eyes." 
"Well, then," said Porthos, "first come to a price with the mercer—and 
a good price!" 
"There's no point," said d'Artagnan, "for I believe that if he doesn't pay 
us, we'll be paid well enough from another quarter." 
At that moment, the noise of hurrying footsteps was heard on the 
stairs, the door opened with a bang, and the unfortunate mercer flew into 
the room where the council was being held. 
"Ah, gentlemen!" he cried. "Save me, in the name of heaven, save me! 
Four men have come to arrest me! Save me, save me!" 
Porthos and Aramis stood up. 
"One moment," cried d'Artagnan, making a sign for them to push their 
half-drawn swords back into their scabbards, "one moment, it's not 
courage that's needed here, it's prudence.” 
"All the same," cried Porthos, "we won't let..." 
"You'll let d'Artagnan do it," said Athos. "He is, I repeat, the best head 
among us, and I, for my part, declare that I will obey him. Do as you like, 
d'Artagnan." 
87 
IX: D'Artagnan Shows Himself  
At that moment, the four guards appeared at the door of the 
antechamber, and seeing four musketeers standing with swords at their 
sides, hesitated to go further. 
"Come in, gentlemen, come in," cried d'Artagnan. "You are here in my 
home, and we are all faithful servants of the king and M. le cardinal." 
"In that case, gentlemen, you won't oppose us if we carry out the 
orders we've received?" asked the one who seemed to be the chief of the 
squad. 
"On the contrary, gentlemen, and we'll even lend you a hand if need 
be." 
"What's he saying?" murmured Porthos. 
"You're a ninny!" said Athos. "Keep quiet!" 
"But you promised me..." the poor mercer said in a whisper. 
"We can only save you if we remain free," d'Artagnan replied rapidly 
and in a whisper, "but if we make as if to defend you, they'll arrest us with 
you." 
"It seems to me, though ..." 
"Come, gentlemen, come," d'Artagnan said aloud. "I have no reason to 
defend the man. I've seen him for the first time today, and he'll tell you 
why himself—it was to demand my rent from me. Isn't that true, M. 
Bonacieux? Answer!" 
"It's the pure truth," cried the mercer, "but Monsieur isn't telling you 
..." 
"Not a word about me, not a word about my friends, not a word about 
the queen above all, or you'll lose everyone without saving yourself. Go on, 
go on, gentlemen, take the man away!" 
And d'Artagnan pushed the stunned mercer into the hands of the 
guards, saying to him: 
"You're a knave, my dear sir; you come to ask money from me—me, a 
musketeer! To prison, gentlemen, I say again, take him away to prison, and 
keep him under lock and key for as long as you can. That will give me time 
to pay." 
The beagles overflowed with gratitude and went off with their prey. 
As they were going downstairs, d'Artagnan slapped the chief on the 
shoulder. 
"Why don't I drink your health and you mine?" he said, filling two 
glasses with the Beaugency that he owed to M. Bonacieux's liberality. 
88 
The Three Musketeers 
"It would be an honor for me," said the chief beagle, "and I accept with 
gratitude." 
"So, then, to your health, M. . . . what is your name?" 
"Boisrenard." 
"M. Boisrenard!" 
"And to yours, sir. What is your name, if you please?" 
"D'Artagnan." 
"To your health, M. d'Artagnan!" 
"And above all the rest," cried d'Artagnan, as if carried away by his 
enthusiasm, "to the health of the king and the cardinal." 
The chief beagle would perhaps have doubted d'Artagnan's sincerity if 
the wine had been bad; but as the wine was good, he was convinced. 
"But what the devil sort of villainy have you pulled now?" said Porthos, 
when the alguazil in chief had rejoined his companions, and the four 
friends found themselves alone again. "Pah! Four musketeers let a wretch 
who is calling for help be arrested right in their midst! A gentleman clinks 
glasses with a writ server!” 
"Porthos," said Aramis, "Athos has already informed you that you are a 
ninny, and I concur with his opinion. D'Artagnan, you're a great man, and 
when you replace M. de Tréville, I'll ask for your patronage in getting 
myself an abbey." 
"Ah, well, I'm completely lost!" said Porthos. "So you approve of what 
d'Artagnan has just done?" 
"I think it's splendid, parbleu!" said Athos. "I not only approve of what 
he's just done, but I congratulate him for it." 
"And now, gentlemen," said d'Artagnan, without bothering to explain 
his conduct to Porthos, "all for one and one for all—that's our motto, isn't 
it?" 
"But still..." said Porthos. 
"Hold out your hand and swear!" Athos and Aramis cried at once. 
Defeated by example, grumbling quietly, Porthos held out his hand, 
and the four friends repeated with one voice the formula dictated by 
d'Artagnan: 
"All for one and one for all." 
"Good. Now let's each retire to his own home," said d'Artagnan, as if he 
had done nothing but give orders all his life, "and watch out, for from this 
moment on, we're at grips with the cardinal." 
89 
X: A Seventeenth-Century Mousetrap  
X: A Seventeenth-Century Mousetrap 
The mousetrap was not invented in our day. Once societies, in their 
formation, had invented any sort of police, the police in turn invented the 
mousetrap. 
As our readers may not yet be familiar with the jargon of the rue de 
Jérusalem,60 and this is the first time since we began to write—and we have 
been at it for fifteen years—that we have used this word applied to this 
thing, we shall explain to them what a mousetrap is. 
When, in whatever house it may be, an individual has been arrested on 
suspicion of some crime, the arrest is kept secret. Four or five men are set 
in ambush in the first room, the door is opened to all who knock, it is 
closed behind them, and they are arrested. In this way, after two or three 
days, just about all the familiars of the establishment have been taken. 
That is what a mousetrap is. 
Master Bonacieux's apartment was thus made into a mousetrap, and 
whoever turned up there was taken and questioned by M. le cardinal's 
people. It goes without saying that, as a private alley led to the second floor 
inhabited by d'Artagnan, those who came to his place were exempt from 
all such visits. 
Besides, the three musketeers came there separately. Each of them had 
set out searching in his own direction, and had found nothing, had 
discovered nothing. Athos had even gone so far as to question M. de 
Tréville, a thing which, given the customary silence of the worthy 
musketeer, had greatly surprised his captain. But M. de Tréville knew 
nothing, except that the last time he had seen the cardinal, the king, and 
the queen, the cardinal had had an extremely worried look, the king had 
been upset, and the reddened eyes of the queen had indicated that she had 
lain awake or wept. But this last circumstance had not struck him very 
much, because, ever since her marriage, the queen had lain awake and 
wept a great deal. 
M. de Tréville charged Athos in any case to serve the king and above all 
the queen, begging him to give the same charge to his comrades. 
As for d'Artagnan, he did not budge from home. He had converted his 
room into an observatory. From the windows he saw people coming to be 
caught; then, as he had removed some tiles from the floor and dug through 
the subflooring, and only the simple ceiling separated him from the room 
90 
The Three Musketeers 
below where the interrogations took place, he heard everything that went 
on between the inquisitors and the accused. 
The interrogations, preceded by a thorough search carried out on the 
arrested person, almost always ran as follows: 
"Did Mme Bonacieux give you anything for her husband or for some 
other person? 
"Did M. Bonacieux give you anything for his wife or for some other 
person? 
"Did either of them confide anything to you by word of mouth?" 
"If they knew anything," d'Artagnan said to himself, "they wouldn't 
question that way. Now, what are they trying to find out? Whether the 
duke of Buckingham is anywhere in Paris, and whether he has had or is 
going to have another interview with the queen." 
D'Artagnan stopped at this idea, which, after all he had heard, was not 
without probability. 
In the meantime, the mousetrap stayed in place, and d'Artagnan's 
vigilance as well. 
The evening of the day after poor Bonacieux's arrest, as Athos was 
leaving d'Artagnan to report to M. de Tréville, as it had just struck nine, 
and as Planchet, who had not yet made the bed, was getting to work, 
someone was heard knocking on the street door. The door opened at once, 
and closed again; someone had just been caught in the mousetrap. 
D'Artagnan rushed for the untiled place, lay down on his stomach, and 
listened. 
Soon cries rang out, then moans that they attempted to stifle. This was 
no interrogation. 
"Devil take it!" d'Artagnan said to himself. "It seems to be a woman! 
They're searching her, she's resisting—they're forcing her, the scoundrels!" 
And d'Artagnan, despite his prudence, had all he could do to keep 
from interfering in the scene that was taking place below him. 
"But I tell you I am the mistress of the house, gentlemen; I tell you I am 
Mme Bonacieux; I tell you I am attached to the queen!" cried the 
unfortunate woman. 
"Mme Bonacieux!" murmured d'Artagnan. "Can I be so lucky as to have 
found what everyone is looking for?" 
"That's just what we've been waiting for," said the interrogators. 
91 
X: A Seventeenth-Century Mousetrap  
The voice became more and more muffled; a violent movement made 
the wainscotting echo. The victim was resisting as much as a woman can 
resist four men. 
"Forgive me, gentlemen, for ..." the voice murmured, after which it 
produced only inarticulate sounds. 
"They've gagged her, they're going to drag her off," cried d'Artagnan, 
straightening up as if moved by a spring. "My sword—good, it's at my side. 
Planchet!” 
"Monsieur?" 
"Run to find Athos, Porthos, and Aramis. One of the three will surely 
be at home, maybe all three will have come back. Tell them to bring their 
arms, to come, to come running. Ah! I remember, Athos is with M. de 
Tréville." 
"But where are you going, Monsieur, where are you going?" 
"I'm climbing down by the window," cried d'Artagnan, "to get there the 
sooner. You put the tiles back, sweep the floor, leave by the door, and run 
where I've told you." 
"Oh! Monsieur, Monsieur, you'll get yourself killed!" cried Planchet. 
"Quiet, imbecile," said d'Artagnan. And clinging to the windowsill with 
his hands, he let himself drop from the second floor, which fortunately was 
not very high, and ended up without a scratch. 
Then he went at once to knock on the door. 
"It's my turn to get caught in the mousetrap, and too bad for the cats 
who come up against such a mouse!" 
The knocker had barely rung out under the young man's hand, when 
the tumult ceased, footsteps approached, the door opened a crack, and 
d'Artagnan, his sword bared, burst into M. Bonacieux's apartment, the 
door of which, no doubt moved by a spring, closed behind him of itself. 
Then those who still lived in the unfortunate house of Bonacieux and 
the nearest neighbors heard great cries, stamping, the clash of swords, and 
a prolonged smashing of furniture. A moment later, those who, surprised 
by this noise, had come to their windows to find out what was causing it, 
were able to see the door open again and four men dressed in black, not 
coining out of it, but flying out like frightened crows, leaving on the floor 
and the table corners the feathers of their wings, that is, tatters of their 
clothing and shreds of their cloaks. 
D'Artagnan emerged the victor without much difficulty, it must be 
said, for only one of the alguazils was armed, and he only defended himself 
92 
The Three Musketeers 
for the sake of form. It is true that the other three had tried to knock the 
young man out with chairs, stools, and pottery; but two or three scratches 
inflicted by the Gascon's blade had frightened them. Ten minutes had 
sufficed for their defeat, and d'Artagnan was left master of the field. 
The neighbors, who had opened their windows with the coolness 
peculiar to the inhabitants of Paris in those times of riots and brawls, 
closed them again once they had seen the four men in black run off: 
instinct told them that for the moment everything was over. 
Besides, it was getting late, and, then as now, people went to bed early 
in the Luxembourg quarter. 
D'Artagnan, left alone with Mme Bonacieux, turned to her. The poor 
woman lay sprawled in an armchair and half in a swoon. 
She was a charming woman of twenty-five or twenty-six, with brown 
hair and blue eyes, a slightly upturned nose, admirable teeth, a marbled 
complexion of rose and opal. There, however, ended the signs that might 
make one confuse her for a grande dame. Her hands were white, but 
without delicacy; her feet did not speak for a woman of quality. 
Fortunately, d'Artagnan was not yet concerned with such details. 
While d'Artagnan was examining Mme Bonacieux, and had come to 
her feet, as we have said, he saw a fine cambric handkerchief on the floor, 
which he picked up out of habit, and at the corner of which he recognized 
the same monogram he had seen on the handkerchief over which he had 
almost had his throat cut by Aramis. 
Since that time, d'Artagnan had been wary of handkerchiefs with coats 
of arms, so he put the one he had picked up back in Mme Bonacieux's 
pocket without saying a word. 
At that moment, Mme Bonacieux came to her senses. She opened her 
eyes, looked around in terror, and saw that the apartment was empty and 
she was alone with her deliverer. 
She held out her hands to him at once and smiled. Mme Bonacieux had 
the most charming smile in the world. 
"Ah, Monsieur! " she said. "It is you who have saved me; allow me to 
thank you." 
"Madame," said d'Artagnan, "I have done only what any gentleman 
would have done in my place. You therefore owe me no thanks." 
"But I do, Monsieur, I do, and I hope to prove to you that you have not 
done a service to an ungrateful woman. But what did these men, whom I 
took at first for thieves, want of me, and why isn't M. Bonacieux here?" 
93 
X: A Seventeenth-Century Mousetrap  
"Madame, these men were more dangerous than thieves could ever be, 
for they are agents of M. le cardinal, and as for your husband, M. 
Bonacieux, he is not here because yesterday they came to take him and 
convey him to the Bastille." 
"My husband in the Bastille!" cried Mme Bonacieux. "Oh, my God! but 
what did he do? The poor, dear man, he's innocence itself!” 
And something like a smile broke through on the still frightened face 
of the young woman. 
"What did he do, Madame?" said d'Artagnan. "I believe his only crime 
is to have at once the good fortune and the misfortune of being your 
husband." 
"But, Monsieur, you know then ..." 
"I know that you were abducted, Madame." 
"And by whom? Do you know that? Oh, if you know, tell me!" 
"By a man of forty to forty-five, with black hair, dark skin, and a scar on 
his left temple." 
"That's right, that's right—but his name?" 
"Ah, his name? That I don't know." 
"And did my husband know I was abducted?" 
"He was informed of it in a letter written to him by the abductor 
himself." 
"And did he suspect," Mme Bonacieux asked with embarrassment, "the 
cause of this event?" 
"He attributed it, I believe, to a political cause." 
"I doubted that at first, but now I think as he does. So, then, this dear 
M. Bonacieux never suspected me for a single instant...?" 
"Ah, far from it, Madame! He was too confident of your wisdom and 
above all of your love." 
A second almost imperceptible smile brushed the rosy lips of the 
beautiful young woman. 
"But," d'Artagnan went on, "how did you escape?" 
"I took advantage of a moment when they left me alone, and as I knew 
since this morning what to make of my abduction, I climbed down from 
the window with the help of my sheets; then, as I thought my husband was 
here, I came running.” 
"To put yourself under his protection?" 
94 
The Three Musketeers 
"Oh, no! The poor, dear man, I knew very well he was incapable of 
defending me; but as he could serve us in another way, I wanted to warn 
him." 
"Of what?" 
"Oh, that is not my secret, so I cannot tell it to you." 
"Besides," said d'Artagnan, "—forgive me, Madame, if, guard though I 
am, I urge you to prudence—besides, I think that we are not in a very 
opportune place for exchanging confidences. The men I put to flight will 
come back with reinforcements. If they find us here, we're lost. I've sent to 
inform three of my friends, but who knows if they've been found at home!” 
"Yes, yes, you're right," cried Mme Bonacieux in fear. "We must flee, we 
must escape!" 
At these words, she put her arm under d'Artagnan's and pulled him 
sharply. 
"But flee where," said d'Artganan, "escape where?" 
"Let's get away from this house first, then we'll see." 
And the young woman and the young man, without bothering to shut 
the door again, went quickly down the rue des Fossoyeurs, turned into the 
rue des Fossés-Monsieur-le-Prince, and did not stop until the place Saint
Sulpice. 
"And now what are we going to do," asked d'Artagnan, "and where do 
you want me to take you?" 
"I'm really at a loss to answer you, I must admit," said Mme Bonacieux. 
"My intention was to warn M. de La Porte through my husband, so that M. 
de La Porte could tell us precisely what has gone on at the Louvre over the 
past three days, and whether it's dangerous for me to appear there." 
"But I can go and warn M. de La Porte," said d'Artagnan. 
"No doubt, only there's one problem: my husband was known at the 
Louvre, and they would let him in, while you are not known, and they will 
shut the door on you." 
"Ah!" said d'Artagnan, "but you must have a porter at some gateway of 
the Louvre who is devoted to you, and who, thanks to some password ..." 
Mme Bonacieux looked fixedly at the young man. 
"And if I give you that password," she said, "will you forget it as soon as 
you've used it?" 
"Word of honor, as I'm a gentleman!" said d'Artagnan, with a tone the 
truthfulness of which was unmistakable. 
95 
X: A Seventeenth-Century Mousetrap  
"Very well, I believe you: you have the look of a brave young man, and 
besides your devotion may make your fortune." 
"I will, without any promises and in all conscience, do all I can to serve 
the king and to be agreeable to the queen," said d'Artagnan. "Dispose of 
me, then, as of a friend." 
"But where will you put me in the meantime?" 
"Don't you have someone from whom M. de La Porte could come and 
fetch you?" 
"No, I don't want to trust myself to anyone." 
"Wait," said d'Artagnan, "we're at Athos's door. Yes, that's it." 
"Who is Athos?" 
"A friend of mine." 
"But what if he's at home and sees me?" 
"He's not there, and I'll take the key with me after I've installed you in 
his apartment." 
"But if he comes back?" 
"He won't come back. Besides, he'll be told that I brought a woman, 
and that the woman is at his place." 
"But you know that will compromise me very badly!" 
"What does it matter to you? You're not known, and besides, in our 
position we can do without certain proprieties!" 
"Let's go to your friend's place, then. Where does he live?" 
"Rue Férou, two steps away." 
"Let's go." 
And the two hastened on their way again. As d'Artagnan had foreseen, 
Athos was not at home. He took the key, which they were accustomed to 
giving him as a friend of the house, went upstairs, and ushered Mme 
Bonacieux into the small apartment that we have already described. 
"Make yourself at home," he said. "Wait, lock the door from inside and 
don't open for anyone, unless you hear three knocks like this." And he 
knocked three times: two taps close together and rather loud, then one 
lighter tap. 
"Very well," said Mme Bonacieux. "Now it's my turn to give you my 
instructions." 
"I'm listening." 
"Go to the gateway of the Louvre on the side of the rue de l'Échelle and 
ask for Germain." 
"Very well. And then?" 
96 
The Three Musketeers 
"He will ask you what you want, and you will answer with these two 
words: Tours and Brussels. He'll be at your orders at once." 
"And what shall I order him to do?" 
"To go and find M. de La Porte, the queen's valet." 
"And when he has found him and M. de La Porte has come?" 
"You will send him to me." 
"Very well, but where and how will I see you again?" 
"Are you very anxious to see me again?" 
"Of course." 
"Well, then, leave that up to me, and don't worry." 
"I rely on your word." 
"You may." 
D'Artagnan bowed to Mme Bonacieux, throwing her the most amorous 
glance it was possible to focus on her charming little person, and as he 
went downstairs, he heard the door close and the lock turn twice behind 
him. In two bounds he was at the Louvre: as he entered the gateway on the 
rue de l'Échelle, it was striking ten. All the events we have just recounted 
had taken place in half an hour. 
Everything went as Mme Bonacieux had foretold. At the agreed 
password, Germain nodded his head; ten minutes later, La Porte was in the 
porter's lodge. In two words d'Artagnan laid the facts before him and told 
him where Mme Bonacieux was. La Porte checked the accuracy of the 
address twice and set off at a run. However, he had barely gone ten steps 
when he came back. 
"Young man," he said to d'Artagnan, "a piece of advice." 
"What?" 
"You could be bothered because of what has just happened." 
"You think so?" 
"Yes. Do you have a friend whose watch runs slow?" 
"Eh?" 
"Go to see him, so that he can testify that you were with him at half
past nine. In legal circles, that is known as an alibi." 
D'Artagnan found the advice prudent. He took to his heels and went to 
M. de Tréville's hôtel, but instead of going into the reception room with 
everyone else, he asked to be let in to his office. As d'Artagnan was a 
habitué of the hôtel, they never made any difficulties about granting his 
requests, and they went to inform M. de Tréville that his young compatriot 
had something important to say to him and was seeking a private 
97 
XI: The Plot Thickens  
audience. Five minutes later, M. de Tréville was asking d'Artagnan how he 
could be of service to him and to what he owed this visit at such a late 
hour. 
"Forgive me, Monsieur!" said d'Artagnan, who had profited from the 
moment when he had been left alone to set the clock back three-quarters 
of an hour. "I thought that, as it was only twenty-five past nine, it was still 
possible to present myself to you." 
"Twenty-five past nine!" cried M. de Tréville, looking at the clock. "But 
that's impossible!" 
"But you see, Monsieur," said d'Artagnan, "there's the proof." 
"Right enough," said M. de Tréville. "I'd have thought it was later. Now, 
then, what do you want of me?" 
Then d'Artagnan told M. de Tréville a long story about the queen. He 
disclosed to him the fears he had formed concerning Her Majesty; he told 
him what he had heard said about the cardinal's plans with respect to 
Buckingham, and all that with a calm and self-assurance that took in M. de 
Tréville all the more in that he himself, as we have said, had noticed 
something new between the cardinal, the king, and the queen. 
At the stroke of ten, d'Artagnan left M. de Tréville, who thanked him 
for his information, charged him to keep at heart his service to the king 
and queen, and went back to the reception room. But at the foot of the 
stairs, he remembered that he had forgotten his walking stick. He 
therefore hurried back upstairs, went into the office again, reset the clock 
to the right time with the touch of a finger, so that the next day no one 
would notice it had been tampered with, and, certain now that he had a 
witness to prove his alibi, went downstairs and soon found himself in the 
street. 
X