 “Just because it was the first day of the year,” commenced daddy, “and
 because parties were about the nicest things in the world to the mind of a
 little girl named Ella, her mother decided to give her one.
 “‘It certainly does seem like the first of the year, or the first of
 something,’ said Ella. ‘It’s a new day, a new year and we have new toys and
 new games. We are even going to have supper out of new dishes.’
 “For among the presents Santa Claus had brought to Ella was a fine set of
 dishes. They were pink and white and there were six cups and saucers, six
 little plates, a teapot, sugar bowl and cream jug. It was really a very
 complete set.
 “They had thin bread and butter, hot chocolate with whipped cream and a
 cake which Ella’s mother called a New Year’s cake. It was pink and white
 on the top with pink sugared trimmings on the white frosting.
 “In the center of the cake was one pink candle, for Ella’s mother said it
 would be quite impossible to have a candle for the number of years there
 had been, and too, it would be nice to have a new way and just consider the
 year a day old.
 “After the cake had been almost entirely eaten they played house. Each
 little girl took a corner of the room as her house and fixed it up with some
 of Ella’s things. They all had their own dolls and many of their other toys so
 they really felt quite at home.
 “Then they began calling on each other, dressing up in shawls and old
 hats which Ella’s mother let them use. After a while they heard a flutter,
 flutter against the window pane, and then another little flapping sound.
“‘It’s a little bird,’ said Ella, as she looked out of the window. ‘It’s right
 on the sill, and I am dreadfully afraid it has hurt its wings. Poor little dear.’
 “They opened the window and Ella took the little bird in her hands. Oh,
 how cold the little bird’s feathers were!
 “‘We’ll take care of you,’ said Ella. They gave the little bird some bread
crumbs and some water. Then he had a delicious piece of lettuce from the
 seeds which Ella had started in a box in her room.
 “Pretty soon the bird began to grow much better and hopped and chirped
 about the room, and then they let him out for he had simply been very
 hungry.
 “‘We’ll put some suet in that tree over there,’ said Ella.
 “‘Let’s put some bread-crumbs,’ said her friends, and then one of them
 added,
 “‘And let’s give some of the New Year cake crumbs too.’
 “So the little bird was given a regular New Year’s feast, and Ella and her
 friends were among other children who decided to look after the feathered
 people through the cold months of the winter and to give them bread
crumbs and suet which they love so well.”
